Soldiers Three

  The Story of the Gadsbys
  In Black and White

By Rudyard Kipling

1895




CONTENTS

  THE GOD FROM THE MACHINE
  OF THOSE CALLED
  PRIVATE LEAROYD'S STORY
  THE BIG DRUNK DRAF'
  THE WRECK OF THE VISIGOTH
  THE SOLID MULDOON
  WITH THE MAIN GUARD
  IN THE MATTER OF A PRIVATE
  BLACK JACK
  POOR DEAR MAMMA
  THE WORLD WITHOUT
  THE TENTS OF KEDAR
  WITH ANY AMAZEMENT
  THE GARDEN OF EDEN
  FATIMA
  THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW
  THE SWELLING OF JORDAN
  DRAY WARA YOW DEE
  THE JUDGMENT OF DUNGARA
  AT HOWLI THANA
  GEMINI
  AT TWENTY-TWO
  IN FLOOD TIME
  THE SENDING OF DANA DA
  ON THE CITY WALL
  THE STORY OF THE GADSBYS
  IN BLACK AND WHITE




THE GOD FROM THE MACHINE

Hit a man an' help a woman, an' ye can't be far wrong anyways.--
     _Maxims of Private Mulvaney._

The Inexpressibles gave a ball. They borrowed a seven-pounder from the
Gunners, and wreathed it with laurels, and made the dancing-floor
plate-glass, and provided a supper, the like of which had never been
eaten before, and set two sentries at the door of the room to hold the
trays of programme-cards. My friend, Private Mulvaney, was one of the
sentries, because he was the tallest man in the regiment. When the
dance was fairly started the sentries were released, and Private
Mulvaney went to curry favour with the Mess Sergeant in charge of the
supper. Whether the Mess Sergeant gave or Mulvaney took, I cannot say.
All that I am certain of is that, at supper-time, I found Mulvaney
with Private Ortheris, two-thirds of a ham, a loaf of bread, half a
_pate-de-foie-gras_, and two magnums of champagne, sitting on the roof
of my carriage. As I came up I heard him saying--

'Praise be a danst doesn't come as often as Ord'ly-room, or, by this
an' that, Orth'ris, me son, I wud be the dishgrace av the rig'mint
instid av the brightest jool in uts crown.'

'_Hand_ the Colonel's pet noosance,' said Ortheris. 'But wot makes you
curse your rations? This 'ere fizzy stuff's good enough.'

'Stuff, ye oncivilised pagin! 'Tis champagne we're dhrinkin' now.
'Tisn't that I am set ag'in. 'Tis this quare stuff wid the little bits
av black leather in it. I misdoubt I will be distressin'ly sick wid
it in the mornin'. Fwhat is ut?'

'Goose liver,' I said, climbing on the top of the carriage, for I knew
that it was better to sit out with Mulvaney than to dance many dances.

'Goose liver is ut?' said Mulvaney. 'Faith, I'm thinkin' thim that
makes it wud do betther to cut up the Colonel. He carries a power av
liver undher his right arrum whin the days are warm an' the nights
chill. He wud give thim tons an' tons av liver. 'Tis he sez so. "I'm
all liver to-day," sez he; an' wid that he ordhers me ten days C. B.
for as moild a dhrink as iver a good sodger tuk betune his teeth.'

'That was when 'e wanted for to wash 'isself in the Fort Ditch,'
Ortheris explained. 'Said there was too much beer in the Barrack
water-butts for a God-fearing man. You was lucky in gettin' orf with
wot you did, Mulvaney.'

'Say you so? Now I'm pershuaded I was cruel hard trated, seein' fwhat
I've done for the likes av him in the days whin my eyes were wider
opin than they are now. Man alive, for the Colonel to whip _me_ on the
peg in that way! Me that have saved the repitation av a ten times
better man than him! 'Twas ne-farious--an' that manes a power av
evil!'

'Never mind the nefariousness,' I said. 'Whose reputation did you
save?'

'More's the pity, 'twasn't my own, but I tuk more trouble wid ut than
av ut was. 'Twas just my way, messin' wid fwhat was no business av
mine. Hear now!' He settled himself at ease on the top of the carriage.
'I'll tell you all about ut. Av coorse I will name no names, for there's
wan that's an orf'cer's lady now, that was in ut, and no more will I
name places, for a man is thracked by a place.'

'Eyah!' said Ortheris lazily, 'but this is a mixed story wot's comin'.'

'Wanst upon a time, as the childer-books say, I was a recruity.'

'Was you though?' said Ortheris; 'now that's extry-ordinary!'

'Orth'ris,' said Mulvaney, 'av you opin thim lips av yours again, I
will, savin' your presince, Sorr, take you by the slack av your trousers
an' heave you.'

'I'm mum,' said Ortheris. 'Wot 'appened when you was a recruity?'

'I was a betther recruity than you iver was or will be, but that's
neither here nor there. Thin I became a man, an' the divil of a man
I was fifteen years ago. They called me Buck Mulvaney in thim days,
an', begad, I tuk a woman's eye. I did that! Ortheris, ye scrub, fwhat
are ye sniggerin' at? Do you misdoubt me?'

'Devil a doubt!' said Ortheris; 'but I've 'eard summat like that
before!'

Mulvaney dismissed the impertinence with a lofty wave of his hand and
continued--

'An' the orf'cers av the rig'mint I was in in thim days _was_
orf'cers--gran' men, wid a manner on 'em, an' a way wid 'em such as
is not made these days--all but wan--wan o' the capt'ns. A bad dhrill,
a wake voice, an' a limp leg--thim three things are the signs av a bad
man. You bear that in your mind, Orth'ris, me son.

'An' the Colonel av the rig'mint had a daughter--wan av thim lamblike,
bleatin', pick-me-up-an'-carry-me-or-I'll-die gurls such as was made
for the natural prey av men like the Capt'n, who was iverlastin' payin'
coort to her, though the Colonel he said time an' over, "Kape out av
the brute's way, my dear." But he niver had the heart for to send her
away from the throuble, bein' as he was a widower, an' she their wan
child.'

'Stop a minute, Mulvaney,' said I; 'how in the world did you come to
know these things?'

'How did I come?' said Mulvaney, with a scornful grunt; 'bekase I'm
turned durin' the Quane's pleasure to a lump av wood, lookin' out
straight forninst me, wid a--a--candelabbrum in my hand, for you to
pick your cards out av, must I not see nor feel? Av coorse I du! Up
my back, an' in my boots, an' in the short hair av the neck--that's
where I kape my eyes whin I'm on duty an' the reg'lar wans are fixed.
Know! Take my word for it, Sorr, ivrything an' a great dale more is
known in a rig'mint; or fwhat wud be the use av a Mess Sargint, or a
Sargint's wife doin' wet-nurse to the Major's baby? To reshume. He was
a bad dhrill was this Capt'n--a rotten bad dhrill--an' whin first I
ran me eye over him, I sez to myself: "My Militia bantam!" I sez, "My
cock av a Gosport dunghill"--'twas from Portsmouth he came to
us--"there's combs to be cut," sez I, "an' by the grace av God,'tis
Terence Mulvaney will cut thim."

'So he wint menowderin', and minanderin', an' blandandherin' roun' an'
about the Colonel's daughter, an' she, poor innocint, lookin' at him
like a Comm'ssariat bullock looks at the Comp'ny cook. He'd a dhirty
little scrub av a black moustache, an' he twisted an' turned ivry wurrd
he used as av he found ut too sweet for to spit out. Eyah! He was a
tricky man an' a liar by natur'. Some are born so. He was wan. I knew
he was over his belt in money borrowed from natives; besides a lot av
other matthers which, in regard for your presince, Sorr, I will
oblitherate. A little av fwhat I knew, the Colonel knew, for he wud
have none av him, an' that, I'm thinkin', by fwhat happened aftherwards,
the Capt'n knew.

'Wan day, bein' mortial idle, or they wud never ha' thried ut, the
rig'mint gave amshure theatricals--orf'cers an' orf'cers' ladies.
You've seen the likes time an' agin, Sorr, an' poor fun 'tis for them
that sit in the back row an' stamp wid their boots for the honour av
the rig'mint. I was told off for to shif' the scenes, haulin' up this
an' draggin' down that. Light work ut was, wid lashins av beer and the
gurl that dhressed the orf'cers' ladies--but she died in Aggra twelve
years gone, an' my tongue's gettin' the betther av me. They was actin'
a play thing called _Sweethearts_, which you may ha' heard av, an' the
Colonel's daughter she was a lady's maid. The Capt'n was a boy called
Broom--Spread Broom was his name in the play. Thin I saw --ut come
out in the actin'--fwhat I niver saw before, an' that was that he was
no gentleman. They was too much together, thim two, a-whishperin'
behind the scenes I shifted, an' some av what they said I heard; for
I was death--blue death an' ivy--on the comb-cuttin'. He was
iverlastin'ly oppressing her to fall in wid some sneakin' schame av
his, an' she was thryin' to stand out against him, but not as though
she was set in her will. I wonder now in thim days that my ears did
not grow a yard on me head wid list'nin'. But I looked straight forninst
me an' hauled up this an' dragged down that, such as was my duty, an'
the orf'cers' ladies sez one to another, thinkin' I was out av
listen-reach: "Fwhat an obligin' young man is this Corp'ril Mulvaney!"
I was a Corp'ril then. I was rejuced aftherwards, but, no matther, I
was a Corp'ril wanst.

'Well, this _Sweethearts'_ business wint on like most amshure
theatricals, an' barrin' fwhat I suspicioned, 'twasn't till the
dhress-rehearsal that I saw for certain that thim two--he the
blackguard, an' she no wiser than she should ha' been--had put up an
evasion.'

'A what?' said I.

'E-vasion! Fwhat you call an elopemint. E-vasion I calls it, bekaze,
exceptin' whin 'tis right an' natural an' proper, 'tis wrong an' dhirty
to steal a man's wan child she not knowin' her own mind. There was a
Sargint in the Comm'ssariat who set my face upon e-vasions. I'll tell
you about that--'

'Stick to the bloomin' Captains, Mulvaney,' said Ortheris; 'Comm'ssariat
Sargints is low.'

Mulvaney accepted the amendment and went on:--

'Now I knew that the Colonel was no fool, any more than me, for I was
hild the smartest man in the rig'mint, an' the Colonel was the best
orf'cer commandin' in Asia; so fwhat he said an' _I_ said was a mortial
truth. We knew that the Capt'n was bad, but, for reasons which I have
already oblitherated, I knew more than me Colonel. I wud ha' rolled
out his face wid the butt av my gun before permittin' av him to steal
the gurl. Saints knew av he wud ha' married her, and av he didn't she
wud be in great tormint, an' the divil av a "scandal." But I niver
sthruck, niver raised me hand on my shuperior orf'cer; an' that was
a merricle now I come to considher it.'

'Mulvaney, the dawn's risin',' said Ortheris, 'an' we're no nearer
'ome than we was at the beginnin'. Lend me your pouch. Mine's all
dust.'

Mulvaney pitched his pouch over, and filled his pipe afresh.

'So the dhress-rehearsal came to an end, an', bekaze I was curious,
I stayed behind whin the scene-shiftin' was ended, an' I shud ha' been
in barricks, lyin' as flat as a toad under a painted cottage thing.
They was talkin' in whispers, an' she was shiverin' an' gaspin' like
a fresh-hukked fish. "Are you sure you've got the hang av the
manewvers?" sez he, or wurrds to that effec', as the coort-martial
sez. "Sure as death," sez she, "but I misdoubt 'tis cruel hard on my
father." "Damn your father," sez he, or anyways 'twas fwhat he thought,
"the arrangement is as clear as mud. Jungi will drive the carr'ge
afther all's over, an' you come to the station, cool an' aisy, in time
for the two o'clock thrain, where I'll be wid your kit." "Faith,"
thinks I to myself, "thin there's a ayah in the business tu!"

'A powerful bad thing is a ayah. Don't you niver have any thruck wid
wan. Thin he began sootherin' her, an' all the orf'cers an' orf'cers'
ladies left, an' they put out the lights. To explain the theory av the
flight, as they say at Muskthry, you must understand that afther this
_Sweethearts'_ nonsinse was ended, there was another little bit av a
play called _Couples_--some kind av couple or another. The gurl was
actin' in this, but not the man. I suspicioned he'd go to the station
wid the gurl's kit at the end av the first piece. 'Twas the kit that
flusthered me, for I knew for a Capt'n to go trapesing about the impire
wid the Lord knew what av a _truso_ on his arrum was nefarious, an'
wud be worse than easin' the flag, so far as the talk aftherwards
wint.'

''Old on, Mulvaney. Wot's _truso_?' said Ortheris.

'You're an oncivilised man, me son. Whin a gurl's married, all her kit
an' 'coutrements are _truso_, which manes weddin'-portion. An' 'tis
the same whin she's runnin' away, even wid the biggest blackguard on
the Arrmy List.

'So I made my plan av campaign. The Colonel's house was a good two
miles away. "Dennis," sez I to my colour-sargint, "av you love me lend
me your kyart, for me heart is bruk an' me feet is sore wid trampin'
to and from this foolishness at the Gaff." An' Dennis lent ut, wid a
rampin', stampin' red stallion in the shafts. Whin they was all settled
down to their _Sweethearts_ for the first scene, which was a long wan,
I slips outside and into the kyart. Mother av Hivin! but I made that
horse walk, an' we came into the Colonel's compound as the divil wint
through Athlone--in standin' leps. There was no one there excipt the
servints, an' I wint round to the back an' found the girl's ayah.

'"Ye black brazen Jezebel," sez I, "sellin' your masther's honour for
five rupees--pack up all the Miss Sahib's kit an' look slippy! _Capt'n
Sahib's_ order," sez I. "Going to the station we are," I sez, an' wid
that I laid my finger to my nose an' looked the schamin' sinner I was.

_'"Bote acchy,"_ says she; so I knew she was in the business, an' I
piled up all the sweet talk I'd iver learnt in the bazars on to this
she-bullock, an' prayed av her to put all the quick she knew into the
thing. While she packed, I stud outside an' sweated, for I was wanted
for to shif the second scene. I tell you, a young gurl's e-vasion manes
as much baggage as a rig'mint on the line av march! "Saints help
Dennis's springs," thinks I, as I bundled the stuff into the thrap,
"for I'll have no mercy!"

'"I'm comin' too," says the ayah.

'"No, you don't," sez I, "later--_pechy!_ You _baito_ where you are.
I'll _pechy_ come an' bring you _sart_, along with me, you
maraudin'"-niver mind fwhat I called her.

'Thin I wint for the Gaff, an' by the special ordher av Providence,
for I was doin' a good work you will ondersthand, Dennis's springs
hild toight. "Now, whin the Capt'n goes for that kit," thinks I, "he'll
be throubled." At the end av _Sweethearts_ off the Capt'n runs in his
kyart to the Colonel's house, an' I sits down on the steps and laughs.
Wanst an' again I slipped in to see how the little piece was goin',
an' whin ut was near endin' I stepped out all among the carr'ges an'
sings out very softly, "Jungi!" Wid that a carr'ge began to move, an'
I waved to the dhriver. _"Hitherao!"_ sez I, an' he _hitheraoed_ till
I judged he was at proper distance, an' thin I tuk him, fair an' square
betune the eyes, all I knew for good or bad, an' he dhropped wid a
guggle like the canteen beer-engine whin ut's runnin' low. Thin I ran
to the kyart an' tuk out all the kit an' piled it into the carr'ge,
the sweat runnin' down my face in dhrops. "Go home," sez I, to the
_sais;_ "you'll find a man close here. Very sick he is. Take him away,
an' av you iver say wan wurrd about fwhat you've _dekkoed_, I'll
_marrow_ you till your own wife won't _sumjao_ who you are!" Thin I
heard the stampin' av feet at the ind av the play, an' I ran in to let
down the curtain. Whin they all came out the gurl thried to hide herself
behind wan av the pillars, an' sez "Jungi" in a voice that wouldn't
ha' scared a hare. I run over to Jungi's carr'ge an' tuk up the lousy
old horse-blanket on the box, wrapped my head an' the rest av me in
ut, an' dhrove up to where she was.

'"Miss Sahib," sez I; "going to the station? _Captain Sahib's_ order!"
an' widout a sign she jumped in all among her own kit.

'I laid to an' dhruv like steam to the Colonel's house before the
Colonel was there, an' she screamed an' I thought she was goin' off.
Out comes the ayah, saying all sorts av things about the Capt'n havin'
come for the kit an' gone to the station.

'"Take out the luggage, you divil," sez I, "or I'll murther you!"

'The lights av the thraps people comin' from the Gaff was showin'
across the parade ground, an', by this an' that, the way thim two women
worked at the bundles an' thrunks was a caution! I was dyin' to help,
but, seein' I didn't want to be known, I sat wid the blanket roun' me
an' coughed an' thanked the Saints there was no moon that night.

'Whin all was in the house again, I niver asked for _bukshish_ but
dhruv tremenjus in the opp'site way from the other carr'ge an' put out
my lights. Presintly, I saw a naygur man wallowin' in the road. I
slipped down before I got to him, for I suspicioned Providence was wid
me all through that night. 'Twas Jungi, his nose smashed in flat, all
dumb sick as you please. Dennis's man must have tilted him out av the
thrap. Whin he came to, "Hutt!" sez I, but he began to howl.

'"You black lump av dirt," I sez, "is this the way you dhrive your
_gharri?_ That _tikka_ has been _owin'_ an' _fere-owin'_ all over the
bloomin' country this whole bloomin' night, an' you as _mut-walla_ as
Davey's sow. Get up, you hog!" sez I, louder, for I heard the wheels
av a thrap in the dark; "get up an' light your lamps, or you'll be run
into!" This was on the road to the Railway Station.

'"Fwhat the divil's this?" sez the Capt'n's voice in the dhark, an'
I could judge he was in a lather av rage.

'"_Gharri_ dhriver here, dhrunk, Sorr," sez I; "I've found his _gharri_
sthrayin' about cantonmints, an' now I've found him."

'"Oh!" sez the Capt'n; "fwhat's his name?" I stooped down an' pretended
to listen.

'"He sez his name's Jungi, Sorr," sez I.

'"Hould my harse," sez the Capt'n to his man, an' wid that he gets
down wid the whip an' lays into Jungi, just mad wid rage an' swearin'
like the scutt he was.

'I thought, afther a while, he wud kill the man, so I sez:--"Stop,
Sorr, or you'll, murdher him!" That dhrew all his fire on me, an' he
cursed me into Blazes, an' out again. I stud to attenshin an' saluted:--
"Sorr," sez I, "av ivry man in this wurruld had his rights, I'm thinkin'
that more than wan wud be beaten to a jelly for this night's work--that
niver came off at all, Sorr, as you see?" "Now," thinks I to myself,
"Terence Mulvaney, you've cut your own throat, for he'll sthrike, an'
you'll knock him down for the good av his sowl an' your own iverlastin'
dishgrace!"

'But the Capt'n niver said a single wurrd. He choked where he stud,
an' thin he went into his thrap widout sayin' good-night, an' I wint
back to barricks.'

'And then?' said Ortheris and I together.

'That was all,' said Mulvaney; 'niver another word did I hear av the
whole thing. All I know was that there was no e-vasion, an' that was
fwhat I wanted. Now, I put ut to you, Sorr, is ten days' C. B. a fit
an' a proper tratement for a man who has behaved as me?'

'Well, any'ow,' said Ortheris,'tweren't this 'ere Colonel's daughter,
an' you _was_ blazin' copped when you tried to wash in the Fort Ditch.'

'That,' said Mulvaney, finishing the champagne, 'is a shuparfluous an'
impert'nint observation.'




OF THOSE CALLED

[Footnote: 1895]

We were wallowing through the China Seas in a dense fog, the horn
blowing every two minutes for the benefit of the fishery craft that
crowded the waterways. From the bridge the fo'c'sle was invisible;
from the hand-wheel at the stern the captain's cabin. The fog held
possession of everything--the pearly white fog. Once or twice when it
tried to lift, we saw a glimpse of the oily sea, the flitting vision
of a junk's sail spread in the vain hope of catching the breeze, or
the buoys of a line of nets. Somewhere close to us lay the land, but
it might have been the Kurile Islands for aught we knew. Very early
in the morning there passed us, not a cable's-length away, but as
unseen as the spirits of the dead, a steamer of the same line as ours.
She howled melodiously in answer to our bellowing, and passed on.

'Suppose she had hit us,' said a man from Saigon. 'Then we should have
gone down,' answered the chief officer sweetly.  'Beastly thing to
go down in a fog,' said a young gentleman who was travelling for
pleasure. 'Chokes a man both ways, y' know.' We were comfortably
gathered in the smoking-room, the weather being too cold to venture
on the deck. Conversation naturally turned upon accidents of fog, the
horn tooting significantly in the pauses between the tales. I heard
of the wreck of the _Eric_, the cutting down of the _Strathnairn_
within half a mile of harbour, and the carrying away of the bow plates
of the _Sigismund_ outside Sandy Hook.

'It is astonishing,' said the man from Saigon, 'how many true stories
are put down as sea yarns. It makes a man almost shrink from telling
an anecdote.'

'Oh, please don't shrink on our account,' said the smoking-room with
one voice.

'It's not my own story,' said the man from Saigon. 'A fellow on a
Massageries boat told it me. He had been third officer of a sort on
a Geordie tramp--one of those lumbering, dish-bottomed coal-barges
where the machinery is tied up with a string and the plates are rivetted
with putty. The way he told his tale was this. The tramp had been
creeping along some sea or other with a chart ten years old and the
haziest sort of chronometers when she got into a fog--just such a fog
as we have now.'

Here the smoking-room turned round as one man, and looked through the
windows.

'In the man's own words, "just when the fog was thickest, the engines
broke down. They had been doing this for some weeks, and we were too
weary to care. I went forward of the bridge, and leaned over the side,
wondering where I should ever get something that I could call a ship,
and whether the old hulk would fall to pieces as she lay. The fog was
as thick as any London one, but as white as steam. While they were
tinkering at the engines below, I heard a voice in the fog about twenty
yards from the ship's side, calling out, 'Can you climb on board if
we throw you a rope?' That startled me, because I fancied we were going
to be run down the next minute by a ship engaged in rescuing a man
overboard. I shouted for the engine-room whistle; and it whistled about
five minutes, but never the sound of a ship could we hear. The ship's
boy came forward with some biscuit for me. As he put it into my hand,
I heard the voice in the fog, crying out about throwing us a rope.
This time it was the boy that yelled, 'Ship on us!' and off went the
whistle again, while the men in the engine-room--it generally took the
ship's crew to repair the _Hespa's_ engines--tumbled upon deck to
know what we were doing. I told them about the hail, and we listened
in the smother of the fog for the sound of a screw. We listened for
ten minutes, then we blew the whistle for another ten. Then the crew
began to call the ship's boy a fool, meaning that the third mate was
no better. When they were going down below, I heard the hail the third
time, so did the ship's boy. 'There you are,' I said, 'it is not twenty
yards from us.' The engineer sings out, 'I heard it too! Are you all
asleep?' Then the crew began to swear at the engineer; and what with
discussion, argument, and a little swearing,--for there is not much
discipline on board a tramp,--we raised such a row that our skipper
came aft to enquire. I, the engineer, and the ship's boy stuck to our
tale. 'Voices or no voices,' said the captain, 'you'd better patch the
old engines up, and see if you've got enough steam to whistle with.
I've a notion that we've got into rather too crowded ways.'

'"The engineer stayed on deck while the men went down below. The skipper
hadn't got back to the chart-room before I saw thirty feet of bowsprit
hanging over the break of the fo'c'sle. Thirty feet of bowsprit, sir,
doesn't belong to anything that sails the seas except a sailing-ship
or a man-of-war. I speculated quite a long time, with my hands on the
bulwarks, as to whether our friend was soft wood or steel plated. It
would not have made much difference to us, anyway; but I felt there
was more honour in being rammed, you know. Then I knew all about it.
It was a ram. We opened out. I am not exaggerating--we opened out,
sir, like a cardboard box. The other ship cut us two-thirds through,
a little behind the break of the fo'c'sle. Our decks split up
lengthways. The mizzen-mast bounded out of its place, and we heeled
over. Then the other ship blew a fog-horn. I remember thinking, as I
took water from the port bulwark, that this was rather ostentatious
after she had done all the mischief. After that, I was a mile and a
half under sea, trying to go to sleep as hard as I could. Some one
caught hold of my hair, and waked me up. I was hanging to what was
left of one of our boats under the lee of a large English ironclad.
There were two men with me; the three of us began to yell. A man on
the ship sings out, 'Can you climb on board if we throw you a rope?'
They weren't going to let down a fine new man-of-war's boat to pick
up three half-drowned rats. We accepted the invitation. We climbed--I,
the engineer, and the ship's boy. About half an hour later the fog
cleared entirely; except for the half of the boat away in the offing,
there was neither stick nor string on the sea to show that the _Hespa_
had been cut down."

'And what do you think of that now?' said the man from Saigon.




PRIVATE LEAROYD'S STORY

And he told a tale.
    --_Chronicles of Gautama Buddha._

FAR from the haunts of Company Officers who insist upon kit-inspections,
far from keen-nosed Sergeants who sniff the pipe stuffed into the
bedding-roll, two miles from the tumult of the barracks, lies the Trap.
It is an old dry well, shadowed by a twisted _pipal_ tree and fenced
with high grass. Here, in the years gone by, did Private Ortheris
establish his depot and menagerie for such possessions, dead and living,
as could not safely be introduced to the barrack-room. Here were
gathered Houdin pullets, and fox-terriers of undoubted pedigree and
more than doubtful ownership, for Ortheris was an inveterate poacher
and pre-eminent among a regiment of neat-handed dog-stealers.

Never again will the long lazy evenings return wherein Ortheris,
whistling softly, moved surgeon-wise among the captives of his craft
at the bottom of the well; when Learoyd sat in the niche, giving sage
counsel on the management of 'tykes,' and Mulvaney, from the crook of
the overhanging _pipal_, waved his enormous boots in benediction above
our heads, delighting us with tales of Love and War, and strange
experiences of cities and men.

Ortheris--landed at last in the 'little stuff bird-shop' for which
your soul longed; Learoyd--back again in the smoky, stone-ribbed North,
amid the clang of the Bradford looms; Mulvaney--grizzled, tender, and
very wise Ulysses, sweltering on the earthwork of a Central India
line--judge if I have forgotten old days in the Trap!

Orth'ris, as allus thinks he knaws more than other foaks, said she
wasn't a real laady, but nobbut a Hewrasian. I don't gainsay as her
culler was a bit doosky like. But she _was_ a laady. Why, she rode iv
a carriage, an' good 'osses, too, an' her 'air was that oiled as you
could see your faice in it, an' she wore dimond rings an' a goold
chain, an' silk an' satin dresses as mun 'a' cost a deal, for it isn't
a cheap shop as keeps enough o' one pattern to fit a figure like hers.
Her name was Mrs. DeSussa, an't' waay I coom to be acquainted wi' her
was along of our Colonel's Laady's dog Rip.

I've seen a vast o' dogs, but Rip was t' prettiest picter of a cliver
fox-tarrier 'at iver I set eyes on. He could do owt you like but speeak,
an' t' Colonel's Laady set more store by him than if he hed been a
Christian. She hed bairns of her awn, but they was i' England, and Rip
seemed to get all t' coodlin' and pettin' as belonged to a bairn by
good right.

But Rip were a bit on a rover, an' hed a habit o' breakin' out o'
barricks like, and trottin' round t' plaice as if he were t' Cantonment
Magistrate coom round inspectin'. The Colonel leathers him once or
twice, but Rip didn't care an' kept on gooin' his rounds, wi' his taail
a-waggin' as if he were flag-signallin' to t' world at large 'at he
was 'gettin' on nicely, thank yo', and how's yo'sen?' An' then t'
Colonel, as was noa sort of a hand wi' a dog, tees him oop. A real
clipper of a dog, an' it's noa wonder yon laady. Mrs. DeSussa, should
tek a fancy tiv him. Theer's one o' t' Ten Commandments says yo' maun't
cuwet your neebor's ox nor his jackass, but it doesn't say nowt about
his tarrier dogs, an' happen thot's t' reason why Mrs. DeSussa cuvveted
Rip, tho' she went to church reg'lar along wi' her husband who was so
mich darker 'at if he hedn't such a good coaat tiv his back yo' might
ha' called him a black man and nut tell a lee nawther. They said he
addled his brass i' jute, an' he'd a rare lot on it.

Well, you seen, when they teed Rip up, t' poor awd lad didn't enjoy
very good 'elth. So t' Colonel's Laady sends for me as 'ad a naame for
bein' knowledgeable about a dog, an' axes what's ailin' wi' him.

'Why,' says I, 'he's getten t' mopes, an' what he wants is his libbaty
an' coompany like t' rest on us, wal happen a rat or two 'ud liven him
oop. It's low, mum,' says I,'is rats, but it's t' nature of a dog; an'
soa's cuttin' round an' meetin' another dog or two an' passin' t' time
o' day. an' hevvin' a bit of a turn-up wi' him like a Christian.'

So she says _her_ dog maunt niver fight an' noa Christians iver fought.

'Then what's a soldier for?' says I; an' I explains to her t' contrairy
qualities of a dog, 'at, when yo' coom to think on't, is one o't'
curusest things as is. For they larn to behave theirsens like gentlemen
born, fit for t' fost o' coompany--they tell me t' Widdy herself is
fond of a good dog and knaws one when she sees it as well as onny body:
then on t' other hand a-tewin' round after cats an' gettin' mixed oop
i' all manners o' blackguardly street-rows, an' killin' rats, an'
fightin' like divils.

T' Colonel's Laady says:--'Well, Learoyd, I doan't agree wi' you, but
you're right in a way o' speeakin', an' I should like yo' to tek Rip
out a-walkin' wi' you sometimes; but yo' maun't let him fight, nor
chase cats, nor do nowt 'orrid': an them was her very wods.

Soa Rip an' me goes out a-walkin' o' evenin's, he bein' a dog as did
credit tiv a man, an' I catches a lot o' rats an we hed a bit of a
match on in an awd dry swimmin'-bath at back o't' cantonments, an' it
was none so long afore he was as bright as a button again. He hed a
way o' flyin' at them big yaller pariah dogs as if he was a harrow
offan a bow, an' though his weight were nowt, he tuk 'em so suddint-like
they rolled over like skittles in a halley, an' when they coot he
stretched after 'em as if he were rabbit-runnin'. Saame with cats when
he cud get t' cat agaate o' runnin'.

One evenin', him an' me was trespassin' ovver a compound wall after
one of them mongooses 'at he'd started, an' we was busy grubbin' round
a prickle-bush, an' when we looks up there was Mrs. DeSussa wi' a
parasel ovver her shoulder, a-watchin' us. 'Oh my!' she sings out;
'there's that lovelee dog! Would he let me stroke him, Mister Soldier?'

'Ay, he would, mum,' sez I, 'for he's fond o' laady's coompany. Coom
here, Rip, an' speeak to this kind laady.' An'Rip, seein' 'at t'mongoose
hed getten clean awaay, cooms up like t' gentleman he was, nivver a
hauporth shy or okkord.

'Oh, you beautiful--you prettee dog!' she says, clippin' an' chantin'
her speech in a way them sooart has o' their awn; 'I would like a dog
like you. You are so verree lovelee--so awfullee prettee,' an' all
thot sort o' talk, 'at a dog o' sense mebbe thinks nowt on, tho' he
bides it by reason o' his breedin'.

An' then I meks him joomp ovver my swagger-cane, an' shek hands, an'
beg, an' lie dead, an' a lot o' them tricks as laadies teeaches dogs,
though I doan't haud with it mysen, for it's makin' a fool o' a good
dog to do such like.

An' at lung length it cooms out 'at she'd been thrawin' sheep's eyes,
as t' sayin' is, at Rip for many a day. Yo' see, her childer was grown
up, an' she'd nowt mich to do, an' were allus fond of a dog. Soa she
axes me if I'd tek somethin' to dhrink. An' we goes into t' drawn-room
wheer her husband was a-settin'. They meks a gurt fuss ower t' dog an'
I has a bottle o' aale, an' he gave me a handful o' cigars.

Soa I coomed away, but t' awd lass sings out--'Oh, Mister Soldier,
please coom again and bring that prettee dog.'

I didn't let on to t' Colonel's Laady about Mrs. DeSussa, and Rip, he
says nowt nawther; an' I gooes again, an' ivry time there was a good
dhrink an' a handful o' good smooaks. An' I telled t' awd lass a heeap
more about Rip than I'd ever heeared; how he tuk t' fost prize at
Lunnon dog-show and cost thotty-three pounds fower shillin' from t'
man as bred him; 'at his own brother was t' propputty o' t' Prince o'
Wailes, an' 'at he had a pedigree as long as a Dook's. An' she lapped
it all oop an' were niver tired o' admirin' him. But when t' awed lass
took to givin' me money an' I seed 'at she were gettin' fair fond about
t' dog, I began to suspicion summat. Onny body may give a soldier t'
price of a pint in a friendly way an' theer's no 'arm done, but when
it cooms to five rupees slipt into your hand, sly like, why, it's what
t' 'lectioneerin' fellows calls bribery an' corruption. Specially when
Mrs. DeSussa threwed hints how t' cold weather would soon be ower an'
she was goin' to Munsooree Pahar an' we was goin' to Rawalpindi, an'
she would niver see Rip any more onless somebody she knowed on would
be kind tiv her.

Soa I tells Mulvaney an' Ortheris all t' taale thro', beginnin' to end.

''Tis larceny that wicked ould laady manes,' says t' Irishman, ' 'tis
felony she is sejuicin' ye into, my frind Learoyd, but I'll purtect
your innocince. I'll save ye from the wicked wiles av that wealthy
ould woman, an' I'll go wid ye this evenin' and spake to her the wurrds
av truth an' honesty. But Jock,' says he, waggin' his heead, ''twas
not like ye to kape all that good dhrink an' thim fine cigars to
yerself, while Orth'ris here an' me have been prowlin' round wid throats
as dry as lime-kilns, and nothin' to smoke but Canteen plug. 'Twas a
dhirty thrick to play on a comrade, for why should you, Learoyd, be
balancin' yourself on the butt av a satin chair, as if Terence Mulvaney
was not the aquil av anybody who thrades in jute!'

'Let alone me/ sticks in Orth'ris, 'but that's like life. Them wot's
really fitted to decorate society get no show while a blunderin'
Yorkshireman like you--'

'Nay,' says I, 'it's none o' t' blunderin' Yorkshireman she wants;
it's Rip. He's the gentleman this journey.'

Soa t' next day, Mulvaney an' Rip an' me goes to Mrs. DeSussa's, an'
t' Irishman bein' a strainger she wor a bit shy at fost. But you've
heeard Mulvaney talk, an' yo' may believe as he fairly bewitched t'
awd lass wal she let out 'at she wanted to tek Rip away wi' her to
Munsooree Pahar. Then Mulvaney changes his tune an' axes her solemn-like
if she'd thought o' t' consequences o' gettin' two poor but honest
soldiers sent t' Andamning Islands. Mrs. DeSussa began to cry, so
Mulvaney turns round oppen t' other tack and smooths her down, allowin'
'at Rip ud be a vast better off in t' Hills than down i' Bengal, and
'twas a pity he shouldn't go wheer he was so well beliked. And soa he
went on, backin' an' fillin' an' workin' up t' awd lass wal she felt
as if her life warn't worth nowt if she didn't hev t' dog.

Then all of a suddint he says:--'But ye _shall_ have him, marm, for
I've a feelin' heart, not like this could-blooded Yorkshireman; but
'twill cost ye not a penny less than three hundher rupees.'

'Don't yo' believe him, mum,' says I; 't' Colonel's Laady wouldn't
tek five hundred for him.'

'Who said she would?' says Mulvaney; 'it's not buyin' him I mane, but
for the sake o' this kind, good laady, I'll do what I never dreamt to
do in my life. I'll stale him!'

'Don't say steal,' says Mrs. DeSussa; 'he shall have the happiest home.
Dogs often get lost, you know, and then they stray, an' he likes me
and I like him as I niver liked a dog yet, an' I _must_ hev him. If
I got him at t' last minute I could carry him off to Munsooree Pahar
and nobody would niver knaw.'

Now an' again Mulvaney looked acrost at me, an' though I could mak
nowt o' what he was after, I concluded to take his leead.

'Well, mum,' I says, 'I never thowt to coom down to dog-steealin', but
if my comrade sees how it could be done to oblige a laady like yo'sen,
I'm nut t' man to hod back, tho' it's a bad business I'm thinkin', an'
three hundred rupees is a poor set-off again t' chance of them Damning
Islands as Mulvaney talks on.'

'I'll mek it three fifty,' says Mrs. DeSussa; 'only let me hev t'dog!'

So we let her persuade us, an' she teks Rip's measure theer an' then,
an' sent to Hamilton's to order a silver collar again t' time when he
was to be her awn, which was to be t' day she set off for Munsooree
Pahar.

'Sitha, Mulvaney,' says I, when we was outside, 'you're niver goin'
to let her hev Rip!'

'An' would ye disappoint a poor old woman?' says he; 'she shall have
_a_ Rip.'

'An' wheer's he to come through?' says I.

'Learoyd, my man,' he sings out, 'you're a pretty man av your inches
an' a good comrade, but your head is made av duff. Isn't our friend
Orth'ris a Taxidermist, an' a rale artist wid his nimble white fingers?
An' what's a Taxidermist but a man who can thrate shkins? Do ye mind
the white dog that belongs to the Canteen Sargint, bad cess to him--he
that's lost half his time an' snarlin' the rest? He shall be lost for
_good_ now; an' do ye mind that he's the very spit in shape an' size
av the Colonel's, barrin' that his tail is an inch too long, an' he
has none av the colour that divarsifies the rale Rip, an' his timper
is that av his masther an' worse. But fwhat is an inch on a dog's tail?
An' fwhat to a professional like Orth'ris is a few ringstraked shpots
av black, brown, an' white? Nothin' at all, at all.'

Then we meets Orth'ris, an' that little man, bein' sharp as a needle,
seed his way through t' business in a minute. An' he went to work
a-practisin' 'air-dyes the very next day, beginnin' on some white
rabbits he had, an' then he drored all Rip's markin's on t' back of
a white Commissariat bullock, so as to get his 'and in an' be sure of
his colours; shadin' off brown into black as nateral as life. If Rip
_hed_ a fault it was too mich markin', but it was straingely reg'lar
an' Orth'ris settled himself to make a fost-rate job on it when he got
haud o' t' Canteen Sargint's dog. Theer niver was sich a dog as thot
for bad timper, an' it did nut get no better when his tail hed to be
fettled an inch an' a half shorter. But they may talk o' theer Royal
Academies as they like. _I_ niver seed a bit o' animal paintin' to
beat t' copy as Orth'ris made of Rip's marks, wal t' picter itself was
snarlin' all t' time an' tryin' to get at Rip standin' theer to be
copied as good as goold.

Orth'ris allus hed as mich conceit on himsen as would lift a balloon,
an' he wor so pleeased wi' his sham Rip he wor for tekking him to Mrs.
DeSussa before she went away. But Mulvaney an' me stopped thot, knowin'
Orth'ris's work, though niver so cliver, was nobut skin-deep.

An' at last Mrs. DeSussa fixed t' day for startin' to Munsooree Pahar.
We was to tek Rip to t' stayshun i' a basket an' hand him ovver just
when they was ready to start, an' then she'd give us t' brass--as was
agreed upon.

An' my wod! It were high time she were off, for them 'air-dyes upon
t' cur's back took a vast of paintin' to keep t' reet culler, tho'
Orth'ris spent a matter o' seven rupees six annas i' t' best drooggist
shops i' Calcutta.

An' t' Canteen Sargint was lookin' for 'is dog everywheer; an', wi'
bein' tied up, t' beast's timper got waur nor ever.

It wor i' t' evenin' when t' train started thro' Howrah, an' we 'elped
Mrs. DeSussa wi' about sixty boxes, an' then we gave her t' basket.
Orth'ris, for pride av his work, axed us to let him coom along wi' us,
an' he couldn't help liftin' t' lid an' showin' t' cur as he lay coiled
oop.

'Oh!' says t' awd lass; 'the beautee! How sweet he looks!' An' just
then t' beauty snarled an' showed his teeth, so Mulvaney shuts down
t' lid and says: 'Ye'll be careful, marm, whin ye tek him out. He's
disaccustomed to travelling by t' railway, an' he'll be sure to want
his rale mistress an' his friend Learoyd, so ye'll make allowance for
his feelings at fost.'

She would do all thot an' more for the dear, good Rip, an' she would
nut oppen t' basket till they were miles away, for fear anybody should
recognise him, an' we were real good and kind soldier-men, we were,
an' she bonds me a bundle o' notes, an' then cooms up a few of her
relations an' friends to say good-by--not more than seventy-five there
wasn't--an' we cuts away.

What coom to t' three hundred and fifty rupees? Thot's what I can
scarcelins tell yo', but we melted it--we melted it. It was share an'
share alike, for Mulvaney said: 'If Learoyd got hold of Mrs. DeSussa
first, sure 'twas I that renumbered the Sargint's dog just in the nick
av time, an' Orth'ris was the artist av janius that made a work av art
out av that ugly piece av ill-nature. Yet, by way av a thank-offerin'
that I was not led into felony by that wicked ould woman, I'll send
a thrifle to Father Victor for the poor people he's always beggin'
for.'

But me an' Orth'ris, he bein' Cockney an' I bein' pretty far north,
did nut see it i' t' saame way. We'd getten t' brass, an' we meaned
to keep it. An' soa we did--for a short time.

Noa, noa, we niver heered a wod more o' t' awd lass. Our rig'mint went
to Pindi, an' t' Canteen Sargint he got himself another tyke insteead
o' t' one 'at got lost so reg'lar, an' was lost for good at last.




THE BIG DRUNK DRAF'

  We're goin' 'ome, we're goin' 'ome--
  Our ship is _at_ the shore,
  An' you mus' pack your 'aversack,
  For we won't come back no more.
  Ho, don't you grieve for me,
  My lovely Mary Ann,
  For I'll many you yet on a fourp'ny bit,
  As a time expired ma-a-an!
      _Barrack-room Ballad._

An awful thing has happened! My friend, Private Mulvaney, who went
home in the _Serapis_, time-expired, not very long ago, has come back
to India as a civilian! It was all Dinah Shadd's fault. She could not
stand the poky little lodgings, and she missed her servant Abdullah
more than words could tell. The fact was that the Mulvaneys had been
out here too long, and had lost touch of England.

Mulvaney knew a contractor on one of the new Central India lines, and
wrote to him for some sort of work. The contractor said that if Mulvaney
could pay the passage he would give him command of a gang of coolies
for old sake's sake. The pay was eighty-five rupees a month, and Dinah
Shadd said that if Terence did not accept she would make his life a
'basted purgathory.' Therefore the Mulvaneys came out as 'civilians,'
which was a great and terrible fall; though Mulvaney tried to disguise
it, by saying that he was 'Ker'nel on the railway line, an' a
consequinshal man.'

He wrote me an invitation, on a tool-indent form, to visit him; and
I came down to the funny little 'construction' bungalow at the side
of the line. Dinah Shadd had planted peas about and about, and nature
had spread all manner of green stuff round the place. There was no
change in Mulvaney except the change of clothing, which was deplorable,
but could not be helped. He was standing upon his trolly, haranguing
a gangman, and his shoulders were as well drilled, and his big, thick
chin was as clean-shaven as ever.

'I'm a civilian now,' said Mulvaney. 'Cud you tell that I was iver a
martial man? Don't answer, Sorr, av you're strainin' betune a compliment
an' a lie. There's no houldin' Dinah Shadd now she's got a house av
her own. Go inside, an' dhrink tay out av chiny in the drrrrawin'-room,
an' thin we'll dhrink like Christians undher the tree here. Scutt, ye
naygur-folk! There's a Sahib come to call on me, an' that's more than
he'll iver do for you onless you run! Get out, an' go on pilin' up the
earth, quick, till sundown.'

When we three were comfortably settled under the big _sisham_ in front
of the bungalow, and the first rush of questions and answers about
Privates Ortheris and Learoyd and old times and places had died away,
Mulvaney said, reflectively--'Glory be there's no p'rade to-morrow,
an' no bun-headed Corp'ril-bhoy to give you his lip. An' yit I don't
know. 'Tis harrd to be something ye niver were an' niver meant to be,
an' all the ould days shut up along wid your papers. Eyah! I'm growin'
rusty, an' 'tis the will av God that a man mustn't serve his Quane for
time an' all.'

He helped himself to a fresh peg, and sighed furiously.

'Let your beard grow, Mulvaney,' said I, 'and then you won't be troubled
with those notions. You'll be a real civilian.'

Dinah Shadd had told me in the drawing-room of her desire to coax
Mulvaney into letting his beard grow. 'Twas so civilian-like,' said
poor Dinah, who hated her husband's hankering for his old life.

'Dinah Shadd, you're a dishgrace to an honust, clanescraped man!' said
Mulvaney, without replying to me. 'Grow a beard on your own chin,
darlint, and lave my razors alone. They're all that stand betune me
and dis-ris-pect-ability. Av I didn't shave, I wud be torminted wid
an outrajis thurrst; for there's nothin' so dhryin' to the throat as
a big billy-goat beard waggin' undher the chin. Ye wudn't have me
dhrink ALWAYS, Dinah Shadd? By the same token, you're kapin' me crool
dhry now. Let me look at that whiskey.'

The whiskey was lent and returned, but Dinah Shadd, who had been just
as eager as her husband in asking after old friends, rent me with--

'I take shame for you, Sorr, coming down here--though the Saints know
you're as welkim as the daylight whin you DO come--an' upsettin'
Terence's head wid your nonsense about--about fwhat's much better
forgotten. He bein' a civilian now, an' you niver was aught else. Can
you not let the Arrmy rest? 'Tis not good for Terence.'

I took refuge by Mulvaney, for Dinah Shadd has a temper of her own.

'Let be--let be,' said Mulvaney. 'Tis only wanst in a way I can talk
about the ould days.' Then to me:--'Ye say Dhrumshticks is well, an'
his lady tu? I niver knew how I liked the gray garron till I was shut
av him an' Asia.'--'Dhrumshticks' was the nickname of the Colonel
commanding Mulvaney's old regiment.--'Will you be seein' him again?
You will. Thin tell him'--Mulvaney's eyes began to twinkle--'tell him
wid Privit--'

'MISTER, Terence,' interrupted Dinah Shadd.

'Now the Divil an' all his angils an' the Firmament av Hiven fly away
wid the "Mister," an' the sin av making me swear be on your confession,
Dinah Shadd! _Privit_, I tell ye. Wid _Privit_ Mulvaney's best
obedience, that but for me the last time-expired wud be still pullin'
hair on their way to the sea.'

He threw himself back in the chair, chuckled, and was silent.

'Mrs. Mulvaney,' I said, 'please take up the whiskey, and don't let
him have it until he has told the story.'

Dinah Shadd dexterously whipped the bottle away, saying at the same
time, 'Tis nothing to be proud av,' and thus captured by the enemy,
Mulvaney spake:--

'Twas on Chuseday week. I was behaderin' round wid the gangs on the
'bankmint--I've taught the hoppers how to kape step an' stop
screechin'--whin a head-gangman comes up to me, wid two inches av
shirt-tail hanging round his neck an' a disthressful light in his oi.
"Sahib," sez he, "there's a rig'mint an' a half av soldiers up at the
junction, knockin' red cinders out av ivrything an' ivrybody! They
thried to hang me in my cloth," he sez, "an' there will be murder an'
ruin an' rape in the place before nightfall! They say they're comin'
down here to wake us up. What will we do wid our women-folk?"

'"Fetch my throlly!" sez I; "my heart's sick in my ribs for a wink at
anything wid the Quane's uniform on ut. Fetch my throlly, an' six av
the jildiest men, and run me up in shtyle.'"

'He tuk his best coat,' said Dinah Shadd reproachfully.

''Twas to do honour to the Widdy. I cud ha' done no less, Dinah Shadd.
You and your digresshins interfere wid the coorse av the narrative.
Have you iver considhered fwhat I wud look like wid me _head_ shaved
as well as my chin? You bear that in your mind, Dinah darlin'.

'I was throllied up six miles, all to get a shquint at that draf'. I
_knew_ 'twas a spring draf' goin' home, for there's no rig'mint
hereabouts, more's the pity.'

'Praise the Virgin!' murmured Dinah Shadd. But Mulvaney did not hear.

'Whin I was about three-quarters av a mile off the rest-camp, powtherin'
along fit to burrst, I heard the noise av the men an', on my sowl,
Sorr, I cud catch the voice av Peg Barney bellowin' like a bison wid
the belly-ache. You remimber Peg Barney that was in D Comp'ny--a red,
hairy scraun, wid a scar on his jaw? Peg Barney that cleared out the
Blue Lights' Jubilee meeting wid the cook-room mop last year?

'Thin I knew ut was a draf of the ould rig'mint, an' I was conshumed
wid sorrow for the bhoy that was in charge. We was harrd scrapin's at
any time. Did I iver tell you how Horker Kelley went into clink nakid
as Phoebus Apollonius, wid the shirts av the Corp'ril an' file undher
his arrum? An' _he_ was a moild man! But I'm digreshin'. 'Tis a shame
both to the rig'mints and the Arrmy sendin' down little orf'cer bhoys
wid a draf av strong men mad wid liquor an' the chanst av gettin' shut
av India, an' _niver a punishment that's fit to be _given right down
an' away from cantonmints to the dock!_ 'Tis this nonsince. Whin I am
servin' my time, I'm undher the Articles av War, an' can be whipped
on the peg for _thim_. But whin I've _served_ my time, I'm a Reserve
man, an' the Articles av War haven't any hould on me. An orf'cer _can't_
do anythin' to a time-expired savin' confinin' him to barricks. 'Tis
a wise rig'lation bekaze a time-expired does _not_ have any barricks;
bein' on the move all the time. 'Tis a Solomon av a rig'lation, is
that. I wud like to be inthroduced to the man that made ut. 'Tis easier
to get colts from a Kibbereen horse-fair into Galway than to take a
bad draf' over ten miles av country. Consiquintly that rig'lation--for
fear that the men wud be hurt by the little orf'cer bhoy. No matther.
The nearer my throlly came to the rest-camp, the woilder was the shine,
an' the louder was the voice av Peg Barney. "'Tis good I am here,"
thinks I to myself, "for Peg alone is employmint for two or three."
He bein', I well knew, as copped as a dhrover.

'Faith, that rest-camp was a sight! The tent-ropes was all skew-nosed,
an' the pegs looked as dhrunk as the men--fifty av thim--the scourin's,
an' rinsin's, an' Divil's lavin's av the Ould Rig'mint. I tell you,
Sorr, they were dhrunker than any men you've ever seen in your mortial
life. _How_ does a draf' get dhrunk? How does a frog get fat? They suk
ut in through their shkins.

'There was Peg Barney sittin' on the groun' in his shirt--wan shoe
off an' wan shoe on--whackin' a tent-peg over the head wid his boot,
an singin' fit to wake the dead. 'Twas no clane song that he sung,
though. 'Twas the Divil's Mass.'

'What's that?'I asked.

'Whin a bad egg is shut av the Arrmy, he sings the Divil's Mass for
a good riddance; an' that manes swearin' at ivrything from the
Commandher-in-Chief down to the Room-Corp'ril, such as you niver in
your days heard. Some men can swear so as to make green turf crack!
Have you iver heard the Curse in an Orange Lodge? The Divil's Mass is
ten times worse, an' Peg Barney was singin' ut, whackin' the tent-peg
on the head wid his boot for each man that he cursed. A powerful big
voice had Peg Barney, an' a hard swearer he was whin sober. I stood
forninst him, an' 'twas not me oi alone that cud tell Peg was dhrunk
as a coot.

'"Good mornin' Peg," I sez, whin he dhrew breath afther cursin' the
Adj'tint Gen'ral; "I've put on my best coat to see you, Peg Barney,"
sez I.

'"Thin take ut off again," sez Peg Barney, latherin' away wid the boot;
"take ut off an' dance, ye lousy civilian!"

'Wid that he begins cursin' ould Dhrumshticks, being so full he clean
disremimbers the Brigade-Major an' the Judge Advokit Gen'ral.

'"Do you know me, Peg?" sez I, though me blood was hot in me wid being
called a civilian.'

'An' him a decent married man!' wailed Dinah Shadd.

'"I do not," sez Peg, "but dhrunk or sober I'll tear the hide off your
back wid a shovel whin I've stopped singin'."

'"Say you so, Peg Barney?" sez I. "'Tis clear as mud you've forgotten
me. I'll assist your autobiography." Wid that I stretched Peg Barney,
boot an' all, an' wint into the camp. An awful sight ut was!

'"Where's the orf'cer in charge av the detachment?" sez I to Scrub
Greene--the manest little worm that ever walked.

'"There's no orf'cer, ye ould cook," sez Scrub; "we're a bloomin'
Republic."

'"Are you that?" sez I; "thin I'm O'Connell the Dictator, an' by this
you will larn to kape a civil tongue in your rag-box."

'Wid that I stretched Scrub Greene an' wint to the orf'cer's tent.
'Twas a new little bhoy--not wan I'd iver seen before. He was sittin'
in his tent, purtendin' not to 'ave ear av the racket.

'I saluted--but for the life av me I mint to shake hands whin I went
in. 'Twas the sword hangin' on the tentpole changed my will.

'"Can't I help, Sorr?" sez I; "'tis a strong man's job they've given
you, an' you'll be wantin' help by sundown." He was a bhoy wid bowils,
that child, an' a rale gintleman.

'"Sit down," sez he.

'"Not before my orf'cer," sez I; an' I tould him fwhat my service was.

'"I've heard av you," sez he. "You tuk the town av Lungtungpen nakid."

'"Faith," thinks I, "that's Honour an' Glory"; for 'twas Lift'nint
Brazenose did that job. "I'm wid ye, Sorr," sez I, "if I'm av use.
They shud niver ha' sent you down wid the draf'. Savin' your presince,
Sorr," I sez, "'tis only Lift'nint Hackerston in the Ould Rig'mint can
manage a Home draf'."

'"I've niver had charge of men like this before," sez he, playin' wid
the pens on the table; "an' I see by the Rig'lations--"

'"Shut your oi to the Rig'lations, Sorr," I sez, "till the throoper's
into blue wather. By the Rig'lations you've got to tuck thim up for
the night, or they'll be runnin' foul av my coolies an' makin' a
shiverarium half through the country. Can you trust your non-coms,
Sorr?"

'"Yes," sez he.

'"Good," sez I; "there'll be throuble before the night. Are you
marchin', Sorr?"

'"To the next station," sez he.

'"Better still," sez I; "there'll be big throuble."

'"Can't be too hard on a Home draf'," sez he; "the great thing is to
get thim in-ship."

'"Faith you've larnt the half av your lesson, Sorr," sez I, "but av
you shtick to the Rig'lations you'll niver get thim in-ship at all,
at all. Or there won't be a rag av kit betune thim whin you do."

''Twas a dear little orf'cer bhoy, an' by way av kapin' his heart up,
I tould him fwhat I saw wanst in a draf' in Egypt.'

'What was that, Mulvaney?' said I.

'Sivin an' fifty men sittin' on the bank av a canal, laughin' at a
poor little squidgereen av an orf'cer that they'd made wade into the
slush an' pitch the things out av the boats for their Lord High
Mightinesses. That made me orf'cer bhoy woild with indignation.

'"Soft an' aisy, Sorr," sez I; "you've niver had your draf' in hand
since you left cantonmints. Wait till the night, an' your work will
be ready to you. Wid your permission, Sorr, I will investigate the
camp, an' talk to my ould frinds. 'Tis no manner av use thryin' to
shtop the divilment _now._"

'Wid that I wint out into the camp an' inthrojuced mysilf to ivry man
sober enough to remimber me. I was some wan in the ould days, an' the
bhoys was glad to see me--all excipt Peg Barney wid a eye like a tomata
five days in the bazar, an' a nose to match. They come round me an'
shuk me, an' I tould thim I was in privit employ wid an income av me
own, an' a drrrawin'-room fit to bate the Quane's; an' wid me lies an'
me shtories an' nonsinse gin'rally, I kept 'em quiet in wan way an'
another, knockin' roun' the camp. 'Twas _bad_ even thin whin I was the
Angil av Peace.

'I talked to me ould non-coms--_they_ was sober--an' betune me an'
thim we wore the draf' over into their tents at the proper time. The
little orf'cer bhoy he comes round, decint an' civil-spoken as might
be.

'"Rough quarters, men," sez he, "but you can't look to be as comfortable
as in barricks. We must make the best av things. I've shut my eyes to
a dale av dog's tricks today, an' now there must be no more av ut."

'"No more we will. Come an' have a dhrink, me son," sez Peg Barney,
staggerin' where he stud. Me little orf'cer bhoy kep' his timper.

'"You're a sulky swine, you are," sez Peg Barney, an' at that the men
in the tent began to laugh.

'I tould you me orf'cer bhoy had bowils. He cut Peg Barney as near as
might be on the oi that I'd squshed whin we first met. Peg wint spinnin'
acrost the tent.

'"Peg him out, Sorr," sez I, in a whishper.

'"Peg him out!" sez me orf'cer bhoy, up loud, just as if 'twas
battalion-p'rade an' he pickin' his wurrds from the Sargint.

'The non-coms tuk Peg Barney--a howlin' handful he was--an' in three
minutes he was pegged out--chin down, tight-dhrawn--on his stummick,
a tent-peg to each arm an' leg, swearin' fit to turn a naygur white.

'I tuk a peg an' jammed ut into his ugly jaw.--"Bite on that, Peg
Barney," I sez; "the night is settin' frosty, an' you'll be wantin'
divarsion before the mornin'. But for the Rig'lations you'd be bitin'
on a bullet now at the thriangles, Peg Barney," sez I.

'All the draf' was out av their tents watchin' Barney bein' pegged.

'"'Tis agin the Rig'lations! He strook him!" screeches out Scrub Greene,
who was always a lawyer; an' some of the men tuk up the shoutin'.

'"Peg out that man!" sez my orf'cer bhoy, niver losin' his timper; an'
the non-coms wint in and pegged out Scrub Greene by the side av Peg
Barney.

'I cud see that the draf' was comin' roun'. The men stud not knowin'
fwhat to do.

'"Get to your tents!" sez me orf'cer bhoy. "Sargint, put a sintry over
these two men."

'The men wint back into the tents like jackals, an' the rest av the
night there was no noise at all excipt the stip av the sintry over the
two, an' Scrub Greene blubberin' like a child. 'Twas a chilly night,
an' faith, ut sobered Peg Barney.

'Just before Revelly, my orf'cer bhoy comes out an' sez: "Loose those
men an' send thim to their tents!" Scrub Greene wint away widout a
word, but Peg Barney, stiff wid the cowld, stud like a sheep, thryin'
to make his orf'cer understhand he was sorry for playin' the goat.

'There was no tucker in the draf' whin ut fell in for the march, an'
divil a wurrd about "illegality" cud I hear.

'I wint to the ould Colour Sargint and I sez:--"Let me die in glory,"
sez I. "I've seen a man this day!"

'"A man he is," sez ould Hother; "the draf's as sick as a herrin'.
They'll all go down to the sea like lambs. That bhoy has the bowils
av a cantonmint av Gin'rals."

'"Amin," sez I, "an' good luck go wid him, wheriver he be, by land or
by sea. Let me know how the draf gets clear."

'An' do you know how they _did?_ That bhoy, so I was tould by letter
from Bombay, bullydamned 'em down to the dock, till they cudn't call
their sowls their own. From the time they left me oi till they was
'tween decks, not wan av thim was more than dacintly dhrunk. An', by
the Holy Articles av War, whin they wint aboard they cheered him till
they cudn't spake, an' _that_, mark you, has not come about wid a draf
in the mim'ry av livin' man! You look to that little orf'cer bhoy. He
has bowils. 'Tis not ivry child that wud chuck the Rig'lations to
Flanders an' stretch Peg Barney on a wink from a brokin an' dilapidated
ould carkiss like mesilf. I'd be proud to serve--'

'Terence, you're a civilian,' said Dinah Shadd warningly.

'So I am--so I am. Is ut likely I wud forget ut? But he was a gran'
bhoy all the same, an' I'm only a mud-tipper wid a hod on my shoulthers.
The whiskey's in the heel av your hand, Sorr. Wid your good lave we'll
dhrink to the Ould Rig'mint--three fingers--standin' up!'

And we drank.




THE WRECK OF THE VISIGOTH

[Footnote: 1895]

       'Eternal Father, strong to save,
        Whose arm hath bound the restless wave,
        Who bidst the mighty ocean keep
        Its own appointed limits deep.'

The lady passengers were trying the wheezy old harmonium in front of
the cuddy, because it was Sunday night. In the patch of darkness near
the wheel-grating sat the Captain, and the end of his cheroot burned
like a head-lamp. There was neither breath nor motion upon the waters
through which the screw was thudding. They spread, dull silver, under
the haze of the moonlight till they joined the low coast of Malacca
away to the eastward. The voices of the singers at the harmonium were
held down by the awnings, and came to us with force.

       'Oh, hear us when we cry to Thee,
        For those in peril on the sea.'

It was as though the little congregation were afraid of the vastness
of the sea. But a laugh followed, and some one said, 'Shall we take
it through again a little quicker?' Then the Captain told the story
of just such a night, lowering his voice for fear of disturbing the
music and the minds of the passengers.

'She was the _Visigoth_,--five hundred tons, or it may have been
six,--in the coasting trade; one of the best steamers and best found
on the Kutch-Kasauli line. She wasn't six years old when the thing
happened: on just such a night as this, with an oily smooth sea, under
brilliant starlight, about a hundred miles from land. To this day no
one knows really what the matter was. She was so small that she could
not have struck even a log in the water without every soul on board
feeling the jar; and even if she had struck something, it wouldn't
have made her go down as she did. I was fourth officer then; we had
about seven saloon passengers, including the Captain's wife and another
woman, and perhaps five hundred deck-passengers going up the coast to
a shrine, on just such a night as this, when she was ripping through
the level sea at a level nine knots an hour. The man on the bridge,
whoever it was, saw that she was sinking at the head. Sinking by the
head as she went along. That was the only warning we got. She began
to sink as she went along. Of course the Captain was told, and he sent
me to wake up the saloon passengers and tell them to come on deck.
'Sounds a curious sort of message that to deliver on a dead still
night. The people tumbled up in their dressing-gowns and _pyjamas_,
and wouldn't believe me. We were just sinking as fast as we could, and
I had to tell 'em that. Then the deck-passengers got wind of it, and
all Hell woke up along the decks.

'The rule in these little affairs is to get your saloon passengers off
first, then to fill the boats with the balance, and afterwards--God
help the extras, that's all. I was getting the starboard stern boat--the
mail-boat--away. It hung as it might be over yonder, and as I came
along from the cuddy, the deck-passengers hung round me, shoving their
money-belts into my hand, taking off their nose-rings and earrings,
and thrusting 'em upon me to buy just one chance for life. If I hadn't
been so desperately busy, I should have thought it horrible. I put
biscuits and water into the boat, and got the two ladies in. One of
'em was the Captain's wife. She had to be put in by main force. You've
no notion how women can struggle. The other woman was the wife of an
officer going to meet her husband; and there were a couple of passengers
beside the lascars. The Captain said he was going to stay with the
ship. You see the rule in these affairs, I believe, is that the Captain
has to bow gracefully from the bridge and go down. I haven't had a
ship under my charge wrecked yet. When that comes, I'll have to do
like the others. After the boats were away, and I saw that there was
nothing to be got by waiting, I jumped overboard exactly as I might
have vaulted over into a flat green field, and struck out for the
mail-boat. Another officer did the same thing, but he went for a boat
full of natives, and they whacked him on the chest with oars, so he
had some difficulty in climbing in.

'It was as well that I reached the mail-boat. There was a compass in
it, but the idiots had managed to fill the boat half full of water
somehow or another, and none of the crew seemed to know what was
required of them. Then the _Visigoth_ went down and took every one
with her--ships generally do that; the corpses don't cumber the sea
for some time.

'What did I do? I kept all the boats together, and headed into the
track of the coasting steamers. The aggravating thing was the thought
that we were close to land as far as a big steamer was concerned, and
in the middle of eternity as far as regarded a little boat. The sea
looks hugeous big from a boat at night.'

       'Oh, Christ, whose voice the waters heard
        And hushed their ravings at Thy word,
        Who walkedst on the foaming deep
        And calm amidst its rage did keep,--
        Oh, hear us when we cry to Thee,
        For those in peril on the sea!'

sang the passengers cheerily.

'That harmonium is disgracefully out of tune,' said the Captain. 'The
sea air affects their insides. Well, as I was saying, we settled down
in the boat. The Captain's wife was unconscious; she lay in the bottom
of the boat and moaned. I was glad she wasn't threshing about the boat:
but what I did think was wrong, was the way the two men passengers
behaved. They were useless with funk--out and out fear. They lay in
the boat and did nothing. Fetched a groan now and again to show they
were alive; but that was all. But the other woman was a jewel. Damn
it, it was worth being shipwrecked to have that woman in the boat; she
was awfully handsome, and as brave as she was lovely. She helped me
bail out the boat, and she worked like a man.

'So we kicked about the sea from midnight till seven the next evening,
and then we saw a steamer. "I'll--I'll give you anything I'm wearing
to hoist as a signal of distress," said the woman; but I had no need
to ask her, for the steamer picked us up and took us back to Bombay.
I forgot to tell you that, when the day broke, I couldn't recognise
the Captain's wife--widow, I mean. She had changed in the night as if
fire had gone over her. I met her a long time afterwards, and even
then she hadn't forgiven me for putting her into the boat and obeying
the Captain's orders. But the husband of the other woman--he's in the
Army--wrote me no end of a letter of thanks. I don't suppose he
considered that the way his wife behaved was enough to make any decent
man do all he could. The other fellows, who lay in the bottom of the
boat and groaned, I've never met. Don't want to. Shouldn't be civil
to 'em if I did. And that's how the _Visigoth_ went down, for no
assignable reason, with eighty bags of mail, five hundred souls, and
not a single packet insured, on just such a night as this.'

       'Oh, Trinity of love and power,
        Our brethren shield in that dread hour,
        From rock and tempest, fire and foe,
        Protect them whereso'er they go.
        Thus evermore shall rise to Thee
        Glad hymns of praise by land and sea.'

'Strikes me they'll go on singing that hymn all night. Imperfect sort
of doctrine in the last lines, don't you think? They might have run
in an extra verse specifying sudden collapse--like the _Visigoth's_.
I'm going on to the bridge, now. Good-night,' said the Captain.

And I was left alone with the steady thud, thud, of the screw and the
gentle creaking of the boats at the davits.

_That_ made me shudder.




THE SOLID MULDOON

       Did ye see John Malone, wid his shinin', brand-new hat?
       Did ye see how he walked like a grand aristocrat?
       There was flags an' banners wavin' high, an' dhress and shtyle were
         shown,
       But the best av all the company was Misther John Malone.
            _John Malone._

There had been a royal dog-fight in the ravine at the back of the
rifle-butts, between Learoyd's _Jock_ and Ortheris's _Blue Rot_--both
mongrel Rampur hounds, chiefly ribs and teeth. It lasted for twenty
happy, howling minutes, and then _Blue Rot_ collapsed and Ortheris
paid Learoyd three rupees, and we were all very thirsty. A dog-fight
is a most heating entertainment, quite apart from the shouting, because
Rampurs fight over a couple of acres of ground. Later, when the sound
of belt-badges clicking against the necks of beer-bottles had died
away, conversation drifted from dog to man-fights of all kinds. Humans
resemble red-deer in some respects. Any talk of fighting seems to wake
up a sort of imp in their breasts, and they bell one to the other,
exactly like challenging bucks. This is noticeable even in men who
consider themselves superior to Privates of the Line: it shows the
Refining Influence of Civilisation and the March of Progress.

Tale provoked tale, and each tale more beer. Even dreamy Learoyd's
eyes began to brighten, and he unburdened himself of a long history
in which a trip to Malham Cove, a girl at Pateley Brigg, a ganger,
himself and a pair of clogs were mixed in drawling tangle.

'An' so Ah coot's yead oppen from t' chin to t' hair, an' he was abed
for t' matter o' a month,' concluded Learoyd pensively.

Mulvaney came out of a reverie--he was lying down--and flourished his
heels in the air. 'You're a man, Learoyd,' said he critically, 'but
you've only fought wid men, an' that's an ivry-day expayrience; but
I've stud up to a ghost, an' that was _not_ an ivry-day expayrience.'

'No?' said Ortheris, throwing a cork at him. 'You git up an' address
the 'ouse--you an' yer expayriences. Is it a bigger one nor usual?'

''Twas the livin' trut'!' answered Mulvaney, stretching out a huge arm
and catching Ortheris by the collar. 'Now where are ye, me son? Will
ye take the wurrud av the Lorrd out av my mouth another time?' He shook
him to emphasise the question.

'No, somethin' else, though,' said Ortheris, making a dash at Mulvaney's
pipe, capturing it and holding it at arm's length; 'I'll chuck it
acrost the ditch if you don't let me go!'

'You maraudin' hathen! 'Tis the only cutty I iver loved. Handle her
tinder, or I'll chuck _you_ acrost the nullah. If that poipe was
bruk--Ah! Give her back to me, Sorr!'

Ortheris had passed the treasure to my hand. It was an absolutely
perfect clay, as shiny as the black ball at Pool. I took it reverently,
but I was firm.

'Will you tell us about the ghost-fight if I do?' I said.

'Is ut the shtory that's troublin' you? Av course I will. I mint to
all along. I was only gettin' at ut my own way, as Popp Doggle said
whin they found him thrying to ram a cartridge down the muzzle.
Orth'ris, fall away!'

He released the little Londoner, took back his pipe, filled it, and
his eyes twinkled. He has the most eloquent eyes of any one that I
know.

'Did I iver tell you,' he began, 'that I was wanst the divil av a man?'

'You did,' said Learoyd with a childish gravity that made Ortheris
yell with laughter, for Mulvaney was always impressing upon us his
great merits in the old days.

'Did I iver tell you,' Mulvaney continued calmly, 'that I was
wanst more av a divil than I am now?'

'Mer--ria! You don't mean it?' said Ortheris.

'Whin I was Corp'ril--I was rejuced aftherwards--but, as I say, _whin_
I was Corp'ril, I was a divil of a man.'

He was silent for nearly a minute, while his mind rummaged among old
memories and his eye glowed. He bit upon the pipe-stem and charged
into his tale.

'Eyah! They was great times. I'm ould now; me hide's wore off in
patches; sinthrygo has disconceited me, an' I'm a married man tu. But
I've had my day--I've had my day, an' nothin' can take away the taste
av that! Oh my time past, whin I put me fut through ivry livin' wan
av the Tin Commandmints between Revelly and Lights Out, blew the froth
off a pewter, wiped me moustache wid the back av me hand, an' slept
on ut all as quiet as a little child! But ut's over--ut's over, an'
'twill niver come back to me; not though I prayed for a week av Sundays.
Was there _any_ wan in the Ould Rig'mint to touch Corp'ril Terence
Mulvaney whin that same was turned out for sedukshin? I niver met him.
Ivry woman that was not a witch was worth the runnin' afther in those
days, an' ivry man was my dearest frind or--I had stripped to him an'
we knew which was the betther av the tu.

'Whin I was Corp'ril I wud not ha' changed wid the Colonel--no, nor
yet the Commandher-in-Chief. I wud be a Sargint. There was nothin' I
wud not be! Mother av Hivin, look at me! Fwhat am I _now?_

'We was quartered in a big cantonmint--'tis no manner av use namin'
names, for ut might give the barricks disrepitation--an' I was the
Imperor av the Earth to my own mind, an' wan or tu women thought the
same. Small blame to thim. Afther we had lain there a year, Bragin,
the Colour Sargint av E Comp'ny, wint an' took a wife that was lady's
maid to some big lady in the Station. She's dead now is Annie
Bragin--died in child-bed at Kirpa Tal, or ut may ha' been
Almorah--seven--nine years gone, an' Bragin he married agin. But she
was a pretty woman whin Bragin inthrojuced her to cantonmint society.
She had eyes like the brown av a buttherfly's wing whin the sun catches
ut, an' a waist no thicker than my arm, an' a little sof' button av
a mouth I would ha' gone through all Asia bristlin' wid bay'nits to
get the kiss av. An' her hair was as long as the tail av the Colonel's
charger--forgive me mentionin' that blunderin' baste in the same
mouthful with Annie Bragin--but'twas all shpun gold, an' time was when
a lock av ut was more than di'monds to me. There was niver pretty woman
yet, an' I've had thruck wid a few, cud open the door to Annie Bragin.

''Twas in the Cath'lic Chapel I saw her first, me oi rolling round as
usual to see fwhat was to be seen.

"You're too good for Bragin, my love," thinks I to mesilf, "but that's
a mistake I can put straight, or my name is not Terence Mulvaney."

'Now take my wurrd for ut, you Orth'ris there an' Learoyd, an' kape
out av the Married Quarters--as I did not. No good iver comes av ut,
an' there's always the chance av your bein' found wid your face in the
dirt, a long picket in the back av your head, an' your hands playing
the fifes on the tread av another man's doorstep. 'Twas so we found
O'Hara, he that Rafferty killed six years gone, when he wint to his
death wid his hair oiled, whistlin' _Larry O'Rourke_ betune his teeth.
Kape out av the Married Quarters, I say, as I did not. 'Tis onwholesim,
'tis dangerous, an' 'tis ivrything else that's bad, but--O my sowl,
'tis swate while ut lasts!

'I was always hangin' about there whin I was off duty an' Bragin wasn't,
but niver a sweet word beyon' ordinar' did I get from Annie Bragin.
"'Tis the pervarsity av the sect," sez I to mesilf, an' gave my cap
another cock on my head an' straightened my back--'twas the back av
a Dhrum Major in those days--an' wint off as tho' I did not care, wid
all the women in the Married Quarters laughin', I was pershuaded--most
bhoys _are_ I'm thinkin'--that no woman born av woman cud stand against
me av I hild up my little finger. I had reason fer thinkin' that
way--till I met Annie Bragin.

'Time an' agin whin I was blandandherin' in the dusk a man wud go past
me as quiet as a cat. "That's quare," thinks I, "for I am, or I should
be, the only man in these parts. Now what divilment can Annie be up
to?" Thin I called myself a blayguard for thinkin' such things; but
I thought thim all the same. An' that, mark you, is the way av a man.

'Wan evenin' I said:--"Mrs. Bragin, manin' no disrespect to you, who
is that Corp'ril man"--I had seen the stripes though I cud niver get
sight av his face--"_who_ is that Corp'ril man that comes in always
whin I'm goin' away?"

'"Mother av God!" sez she, turnin' as white as my belt, "have _you_
seen him too?"

'"Seen him!" sez I; "av coorse I have. Did ye want me not to see him,
for"--we were standin' talkin' in the dhark, outside the veranda av
Bragin's quarters--"you'd betther tell me to shut me eyes. Onless I'm
mistaken, he's come now."

'An', sure enough, the Corp'ril was walkin' to us, hangin' his head
down as though he was ashamed av himsilf.

'"Good-night, Mrs. Bragin," sez I, very cool; "'tis not for me to
interfere wid your _a-moors;_ but you might manage things wid more
dacincy. I'm off to canteen," I sez.

'I turned on my heel an' wint away, swearin' I wud give that man a
dhressin' that wud shtop him messin' about the Married Quarters for
a month an' a week. I had not tuk ten paces before Annie Bragin was
hangin' on to my arm, an' I cud feel that she was shakin' all over.

'"Stay wid me, Mister Mulvaney," sez she; "you're flesh an' blood, at
the least--are ye not?"

'"I'm _all_ that," sez I, an' my anger wint away in a flash. "Will I
want to be asked twice, Annie?"

'Wid that I slipped my arm round her waist, for, begad, I fancied she
had surrindered at discretion, an' the honours av war were mine.

'"Fwhat nonsinse is this?" sez she, dhrawin' hersilf up on the tips
av her dear little toes. "Wid the mother's milk not dhry on your
impident mouth? Let go!" she sez.

'"Did ye not say just now that I was flesh an' blood?" sez I. "I have
not changed since," I sez; an' I kep' my arm where ut was.

'"Your arms to yoursilf!" sez she, an' her eyes sparkild.

'"Sure, 'tis only human nature," sez I, an' I kep' my arm where ut was.

'"Nature or no nature," sez she, "you take your arm away or I'll tell
Bragin, an' he'll alter the nature av your head. Fwhat d'you take me
for?" she sez.

'"A woman," sez I; "the prettiest in barricks."

'"A _wife_," sez she; "the straightest in cantonmints!"

'Wid that I dropped my arm, fell back tu paces, an' saluted, for I saw
that she mint fwhat she said.'

'Then you know something that some men would give a good deal to be
certain of. How could you tell?' I demanded in the interests of Science.

'"Watch the hand," said Mulvaney; "av she shuts her hand tight, thumb
down over the knuckle, take up your hat an' go. You'll only make a
fool av yoursilf av you shtay. But av the hand lies opin on the lap,
or av you see her thryin' to shut ut, an' she can't,--go on! She's not
past reasonin' wid."

'Well, as I was sayin', I fell back, saluted, an' was goin' away.

'"Shtay wid me," she sez. "Look! He's comin' again."

'She pointed to the veranda, an' by the Hoight av Impart'nince, the
Corp'ril man was comin' out av Bragin's quarters.

'"He's done that these five evenin's past," sez Annie Bragin. "Oh,
fwhat will I do!"

"He'll not do ut again," sez I, for I was fightin' mad.

'Kape away from a man that has been a thrifle crossed in love till the
fever's died down. He rages like a brute beast.

'I wint up to the man in the veranda, manin', as sure as I sit, to
knock the life out av him. He slipped into the open. "Fwhat are you
doin' philanderin' about here, ye scum av the gutter?" sez I polite,
to give him his warnin', for I wanted him ready.

'He niver lifted his head, but sez, all mournful an' melancolius, as
if he thought I wud be sorry for him: "I can't find her," sez he.

'"My troth," sez I, "you've lived too long--you an' your seekin's an'
findin's in a dacint married woman's quarters! Hould up your head, ye
frozen thief av Genesis," sez I, "an' you'll find all you want an'
more!"

'But he niver hild up, an' I let go from the shoulther to where the
hair is short over the eyebrows.

'"That'll do your business," sez I, but it nearly did mine instid. I
put my bodyweight behind the blow, but I hit nothing at all, an' near
put my shoulther out. The Corp'ril man was not there, an' Annie Bragin,
who had been watchin' from the veranda, throws up her heels, an' carries
on like a cock whin his neck's wrung by the dhrummer-bhoy. I wint back
to her, for a livin' woman, an' a woman like Annie Bragin, is more
than a p'rade-groun' full av ghosts. I'd niver seen a woman faint
before, an' I stud like a shtuck calf, askin' her whether she was dead,
an' prayin' her for the love av me, an' the love av her husband, an'
the love av the Virgin, to opin her blessed eyes again, an' callin'
mesilf all the names undher the canopy av Hivin for plaguin' her wid
my miserable _a-moors_ whin I ought to ha' stud betune her an' this
Corp'ril man that had lost the number av his mess.

'I misremimber fwhat nonsinse I said, but I was not so far gone that
I cud not hear a fut on the dirt outside. 'Twas Bragin comin' in, an'
by the same token Annie was comin' to. I jumped to the far end av the
veranda an' looked as if butter wudn't melt in my mouth. But Mrs.
Quinn, the Quarter-Master's wife that was, had tould Bragin about my
hangin' round Annie.

'"I'm not pleased wid you, Mulvaney," sez Bragin, unbucklin' his sword,
for he had been on duty.

'"That's bad hearin'," I sez, an' I knew that the pickets were dhriven
in. "What for, Sargint?" sez I.

'"Come outside," sez he, "an' I'll show you why."

'"I'm willin'," I sez; "but my stripes are none so ould that I can
afford to loses him. Tell me now, _who_ do I go out wid?" sez I.

'He was a quick man an' a just, an' saw fwhat I wud be afther. "Wid
Mrs. Bragin's husband," sez he. He might ha' known by me askin' that
favour that I had done him no wrong.

'We wint to the back av the arsenal an' I stripped to him, an' for ten
minutes 'twas all I cud do to prevent him killin' himself against my
fistes. He was mad as a dumb dog--just frothing wid rage; but he had
no chanst wid me in reach, or learnin', or anything else.

'"Will ye hear reason?" sez I, whin his first wind was run out.

'"Not whoile I can see," sez he. Wid that I gave him both, one after
the other, smash through the low gyard that he'd been taught whin he
was a boy, an' the eyebrow shut down on the cheek-bone like the wing
av a sick crow.

'"Will ye hear reason now, ye brave man?" sez I.

'"Not whoile I can speak," sez he, staggerin' up blind as a stump. I
was loath to do ut, but I wint round an' swung into the jaw side-on
an' shifted ut a half pace to the lef'.

'"Will ye hear reason now?" sez I; "I can't keep my timper much longer,
an' 'tis like I will hurt you."

'"Not whoile I can stand," he mumbles out av one corner av his mouth.
So I closed an' threw him--blind, dumb, an' sick, an' jammed the jaw
straight.

'"You're an ould fool, _Mister_ Bragin," sez I.

'"You're a young thief," sez he, "an' you've bruk my heart, you an'
Annie betune you!"

'Thin he began cryin' like a child as he lay. I was sorry as I had
niver been before. 'Tis an awful thing to see a strong man cry.

'"I'll swear on the Cross!" sez I.

'"I care for none av your oaths," sez he.

'"Come back to your quarters," sez I, "an' if you don't believe the
livin', begad, you shall listen to the dead," I sez.

'I hoisted him an' tuk him back to his quarters. "Mrs. Bragin," sez
I, "here's a man that you can cure quicker than me."

'"You've shamed me before my wife," he whimpers.

'"Have I so?" sez I. "By the look on Mrs. Bragin's face I think I'm
for a dhressin'-down worse than I gave you."

'An' I was! Annie Bragin was woild wid indignation. There was not a
name that a dacint woman cud use that was not given my way. I've had
my Colonel walk roun' me like a cooper roun' a cask for fifteen minutes
in Ord'ly Room, bekaze I wint into the Corner Shop an' unstrapped
lewnatic; but all I iver tuk from his rasp av a tongue was ginger-pop
to fwhat Annie tould me. An' that, mark you, is the way av a woman.

'Whin ut was done for want av breath, an' Annie was bendin' over her
husband, I sez: "'Tis all thrue, an' I'm a blayguard an' you're an
honest woman; but will you tell him of wan service that I did you?"

'As I finished speakin' the Corp'ril man came up to the veranda, an'
Annie Bragin shquealed. The moon was up, an' we cud see his face.

'"I can't find her," sez the Corp'ril man, an' wint out like the puff
av a candle.

'"Saints stand betune us an' evil!" sez Bragin, crossin' himself;
"that's Flahy av the Tyrone."

'"Who was he?" I sez, "for he has given me a dale av fightin' this
day."

'Bragin tould us that Flahy was a Corp'ril who lost his wife av cholera
in those quarters three years gone, an' wint mad, an' _walked_ afther
they buried him, huntin' for her.

'"Well," sez I to Bragin, "he's been hookin' out av Purgathory to kape
company wid Mrs. Bragin ivry evenin' for the last fortnight. You may
tell Mrs. Quinn, wid my love, for I know that she's been talkin' to
you, an' you've been listenin', that she ought to ondherstand the
differ 'twixt a man an' a ghost. She's had three husbands," sez I,
"an' _you_'ve got a wife too good for you. Instid av which you lave
her to be boddered by ghosts an'--an' all manner av evil spirruts.
I'll niver go talkin' in the way av politeness to a man's wife again.
Good-night to you both," sez I; an' wid that I wint away, havin' fought
wid woman, man and Divil all in the heart av an hour. By the same token
I gave Father Victor wan rupee to say a mass for Flahy's soul, me
havin' discommoded him by shticking my fist into his systim.'

'Your ideas of politeness seem rather large, Mulvaney,' I said.

'That's as you look at ut,' said Mulvaney calmly; 'Annie Bragin niver
cared for me. For all that, I did not want to leave anything behin'
me that Bragin could take hould av to be angry wid her about--whin an
honust wurrd cud ha' cleared all up. There's nothing like opin-speakin'.
Orth'ris, ye scutt, let me put me oi to that bottle, for my throat's
as dhry as whin I thought I wud get a kiss from Annie Bragin. An'
that's fourteen years gone! Eyah! Cork's own city an' the blue sky
above ut--an' the times that was--the times that was!'




WITH THE MAIN GUARD

       Der jungere Uhlanen
       Sit round mit open mouth
       While Breitmann tell dem stdories
       Of fightin' in the South;
       Und gif dem moral lessons,
       How before der battle pops,
       Take a little prayer to Himmel
       Und a goot long drink of Schnapps.
            _Hans Breitmann's Ballads._

'Mary, Mother av Mercy, fwhat the divil possist us to take an' kape
this melancolious counthry? Answer me that, Sorr.'

It was Mulvaney who was speaking. The time was one o'clock of a stifling
June night, and the place was the main gate of Fort Amara, most desolate
and least desirable of all fortresses in India. What I was doing there
at that hour is a question which only concerns M'Grath, the Sergeant
of the Guard, and the men on the gate.

'Slape,' said Mulvaney, 'is a shuparfluous necessity. This gyard'll
shtay lively till relieved.' He himself was stripped to the waist;
Learoyd on the next bedstead was dripping from the skinful of water
which Ortheris, clad only in white trousers, had just sluiced over his
shoulders; and a fourth private was muttering uneasily as he dozed
open-mouthed in the glare of the great guard-lantern. The heat under
the bricked archway was terrifying.

'The worrst night that iver I remimber. Eyah! Is all Hell loose this
tide?' said Mulvaney. A puff of burning wind lashed through the
wicket-gate like a wave of the sea, and Ortheris swore.

'Are ye more heasy, Jock?' he said to Learoyd. 'Put yer 'ead between
your legs. It'll go orf in a minute.'

'Ah don't care. Ah would not care, but ma heart is plaayin' tivvy-tivvy
on ma ribs. Let me die! Oh, leave me die!' groaned the huge
Yorkshireman, who was feeling the heat acutely, being of fleshly build.

The sleeper under the lantern roused for a moment and raised himself
on his elbow.--'Die and be damned then!' he said. '_I_'m damned and
I can't die!'

'Who's that?' I whispered, for the voice was new to me.

'Gentleman born,' said Mulvaney; 'Corp'ril wan year, Sargint nex'.
Red-hot on his C'mission, but dhrinks like a fish. He'll be gone before
the cowld weather's here. So!'

He slipped his boot, and with the naked toe just touched the trigger
of his Martini. Ortheris misunderstood the movement, and the next
instant the Irishman's rifle was dashed aside, while Ortheris stood
before him, his eyes blazing with reproof.

'You!' said Ortheris. 'My Gawd, _you!_ If it was you wot would _we_
do?'

'Kape quiet, little man,' said Mulvaney, putting him aside, but very
gently; 'tis not me, nor will ut be me whoile Dinah Shadd's here. I
was but showin' something.'

Learoyd, bowed on his bedstead, groaned, and the gentleman-ranker
sighed in his sleep. Ortheris took Mulvaney's tendered pouch and we
three smoked gravely for a space while the dust-devils danced on the
glacis and scoured the red-hot plain.

'Pop?' said Ortheris, wiping his forehead.

'Don't tantalise wid talkin' av dhrink, or I'll shtuff you into your
own breech-block an'--fire you off!' grunted Mulvaney.

Ortheris chuckled, and from a niche in the veranda produced six bottles
of gingerade.

'Where did ye get ut, ye Machiavel?' said Mulvaney. ''Tis no bazar
pop.'

''Ow do _Hi_ know wot the Orf'cers drink?' answered Ortheris. 'Arst
the mess-man.'

'Ye'll have a Disthrict Coort-martial settin' on ye yet, me son,' said
Mulvaney, 'but'--he opened a bottle--'I will not report ye this time.
Fwhat's in the mess-kid is mint for the belly, as they say, 'specially
whin that mate is dhrink. Here's luck! A bloody war or a--no, we've
got the sickly season. War, thin!'--he waved the innocent 'pop' to the
four quarters of Heaven. 'Bloody war! North, East, South, an' West!
Jock, ye quakin' hayrick, come an' dhrink.'

But Learoyd, half mad with the fear of death presaged in the swelling
veins in his neck, was begging his Maker to strike him dead, and
fighting for more air between his prayers. A second time Ortheris
drenched the quivering body with water, and the giant revived.

'An' Ah divn't see thot a mon is i' fettle for gooin' on to live; an'
Ah divn't see thot there is owt for t' livin' for. Hear now, lads!
Ah'm tired--tired. There's nobbut watter i' ma bones. Let me die!'

The hollow of the arch gave back Learoyd's broken whisper in a bass
boom. Mulvaney looked at me hopelessly, but I remembered how the madness
of despair had once fallen upon Ortheris, that weary, weary afternoon
on the banks of the Khemi River, and how it had been exorcised by the
skilful magician Mulvaney.

'Talk, Terence!' I said, 'or we shall have Learoyd slinging loose, and
he'll be worse than Ortheris was. Talk! He'll answer to your voice.'

Almost before Ortheris had deftly thrown all the rifles of the Guard
on Mulvaney's bedstead, the Irishman's voice was uplifted as that of
one in the middle of a story, and, turning to me, he said--

'In barricks or out of it, as _you_ say, Sorr, an Oirish rig'mint is
the divil an' more. 'Tis only fit for a young man wid eddicated
fisteses. Oh the crame av disruption is an Oirish rig'mint, an' rippin',
tearin', ragin' scattherers in the field av war! My first rig'mint was
Oirish--Faynians an' rebils to the heart av their marrow was they, an'
_so_ they fought for the Widdy betther than most, bein'
contrairy--Oirish. They was the Black Tyrone. You've heard av thim,
Sorr?'

Heard of them! I knew the Black Tyrone for the choicest collection of
unmitigated blackguards, dog-stealers, robbers of hen-roosts, assaulters
of innocent citizens, and recklessly daring heroes in the Army List.
Half Europe and half Asia has had cause to know the Black Tyrone--good
luck be with their tattered Colours as Glory has ever been!

'They _was_ hot pickils an' ginger! I cut a man's head tu deep wid my
belt in the days av my youth, an', afther some circumstances which I
will oblitherate, I came to the Ould Rig'mint, bearin' the character
av a man wid hands an' feet. But, as I was goin' to tell you, I fell
acrost the Black Tyrone agin wan day whin we wanted thim powerful bad.
Orth'ris, me son, fwhat was the name av that place where they sint wan
comp'ny av us an' wan av the Tyrone roun' a hill an' down again, all
for to tache the Paythans something they'd niver learned before? Afther
Ghunzi 'twas.'

'Don't know what the bloomin' Paythans called it. We called it Silver's
Theayter. You know that, sure!'

'Silver's Theatre--so 'twas. A gut betune two hills, as black as a
bucket, an' as thin as a girl's waist. There was over-many Paythans
for our convaynience in the gut, an' begad they called thimselves a
Reserve--bein' impident by nature! Our Scotchies an' lashins av Gurkeys
was poundin' into some Paythan rig'mints, I think 'twas. Scotchies an'
Gurkeys are twins bekaze they're so onlike an' they get dhrunk together
whin God plazes. As I was sayin', they sint wan comp'ny av the Ould
an' wan of the Tyrone to double up the hill an' clane out the Paythan
Reserve. Orf'cers was scarce in thim days, fwhat with dysintry an' not
takin' care av thimselves, an' we was sint out wid only wan orf'cer
for the comp'ny; but he was a Man that had his feet beneath him, an'
all his teeth in their sockuts.'

'Who was he?' I asked.

'Captain O'Neil--Old Crook--Cruikna-bulleen--him that I tould ye that
tale av whin he was in Burma.
  [Footnote:
       Now first of the foemen of Boh Da Thone
       Was Captain O'Neil of the Black Tyrone.
  _The Ballad of Boh Da Thone._] Hah!
He was a Man! The Tyrone tuk a little orf'cer bhoy, but divil a bit
was he in command, as I'll dimonstrate presintly. We an' they came
over the brow av the hill, wan on each side av the gut, an' there was
that ondacint Reserve waitin' down below like rats in a pit.

'"Howld on, men," sez Crook, who tuk a mother's care av us always.
"Rowl some rocks on thim by way av visitin' kyards." We hadn't rowled
more than twinty bowlders, an' the Paythans was beginnin' to swear
tremenjus, whin the little orf'cer bhoy av the Tyrone shqueaks out
acrost the valley:--"Fwhat the devil an' all are you doin', shpoilin'
the fun for my men? Do ye not see they'll stand?"

'"Faith, that's a rare pluckt wan!" sez Crook. "Niver mind the rocks,
men. Come along down an' take tay wid thim!"

'"There's damned little sugar in ut!" sez my rear-rank man; but Crook
heard.

'"Have ye not all got spoons?" he sez, laughin', an' down we wint as
fast as we cud. Learoyd bein' sick at the Base, he, av coorse, was not
there.

'Thot's a lie!' said Learoyd, dragging his bedstead nearer. 'Ah gotten
_thot_ theer, an' you knaw it, Mulvaney.' He threw up his arms, and
from the right armpit ran, diagonally through the fell of his chest,
a thin white line terminating near the fourth left rib.

'My mind's goin',' said Mulvaney, the unabashed. 'Ye were there. Fwhat
I was thinkin' of! 'Twas another man, av coorse. Will, you'll remember
thin, Jack, how we an' the Tyrone met wid a bang at the bottom an' got
jammed past all movin' among the Paythans.'

'Ow! It _was_ a tight 'ole. I was squeezed till I thought I'd bloomin'
well bust,' said Ortheris, rubbing his stomach meditatively.

''Twas no place for a little man, but _wan_ little man'--Mulvaney put
his hand on Ortheris's shoulder--'saved the life av me. There we shtuck,
for divil a bit did the Paythans flinch, an' divil a bit dare we; our
business bein' to clear 'em out. An' the most exthryordinar' thing av
all was that we an' they just rushed into each other's arrums, an'
there was no firing for a long time. Nothin' but knife an' bay'nit
when we cud get our hands free: an' that was not often. We was breast-on
to thim, an' the Tyrone was yelpin' behind av us in a way I didn't see
the lean av at first. But I knew later, an' so did the Paythans.

'"Knee to knee!" sings out Crook, wid a laugh whin the rush av our
comin' into the gut shtopped, an' he was huggin' a hairy great Paythan,
neither bein' able to do anything to the other, tho' both was wishful.

'"Breast to breast!" he sez, as the Tyrone was pushin' us forward
closer an' closer.

'"An' hand over back!" sez a Sargint that was behin'. I saw a sword
lick out past Crook's ear, an' the Paythan was tuk in the apple av his
throat like a pig at Dromeen fair.

'"Thank ye, Brother Inner Guard," sez Crook, cool as a cucumber widout
salt. "I wanted that room." An' he wint forward by the thickness av
a man's body, havin' turned the Paythan undher him. The man bit the
heel off Crook's boot in his death-bite.

'"Push, men!" sez Crook. "Push, ye paper-backed beggars!" he sez. "Am
I to pull ye through?" So we pushed, an' we kicked, an' we swung, an'
we swore, an' the grass bein' slippery, our heels wouldn't bite, an'
God help the front-rank man that wint down that day!'

''Ave you ever bin in the Pit hentrance o' the Vic, on a thick night?'
interrupted Ortheris. 'It was worse nor that, for they was goin' one
way an' we wouldn't 'ave it. Leastways, I 'adn't much to say.'

'Faith, me son, ye said ut, thin. I kep' the little man betune my knees
as long as I cud, but he was pokin' roun' wid his bay'nit, blindin'
an' stiffin' feroshus. The devil of a man is Orth'ris in a
ruction--aren't ye?' said Mulvaney.

'Don't make game!' said the Cockney. 'I knowed I wasn't no good then,
but I guv 'em compot from the lef' flank when we opened out. No!' he
said, bringing down his hand with a thump on the bedstead, 'a bay'nit
ain't no good to a little man--might as well 'ave a bloomin'
fishin'-rod! I 'ate a clawin', maulin' mess, but gimme a breech that's
wore out a bit, an' hamminition one year in store, to let the powder
kiss the bullet, an' put me somewheres where I ain't trod on by 'ulkin
swine like you, an' s'elp me Gawd, I could bowl you over five times
outer seven at height 'undred. Would yer try, you lumberin' Hirishman.'

'No, ye wasp. I've seen ye do ut. I say there's nothin' better than
the bay'nit, wid a long reach, a double twist av ye can, an' a slow
recover.'

'Dom the bay'nit,' said Learoyd, who had been listening intently. 'Look
a-here!' He picked up a rifle an inch below the foresight with an
underhand action, and used it exactly as a man would use a dagger.

'Sitha,' said he softly, 'thot's better than owt, for a mon can bash
t' faace wi' thot, an', if he divn't, he can breeak t' forearm o' t'
gaard.' Tis not i' t' books, though. Gie me t' butt.'

'Each does ut his own way, like makin' love,' said Mulvaney quietly;
'the butt or the bay'nit or the bullet accordin' to the natur' av the
man. Well, as I was sayin', we shtuck there breathin' in each other's
faces and swearin' powerful; Orth'ris cursin' the mother that bore him
bekaze he was not three inches taller.

'Prisintly he sez:--"Duck, ye lump, an' I can get at a man over your
shouldher!"

'"You'll blow me head off," I sez, throwin' my arm clear; "go through
under my arm-pit, ye bloodthirsty little scutt," sez I, "but don't
shtick me or I'll wring your ears round."

'Fwhat was ut ye gave the Paythan man forninst me, him that cut at me
whin I cudn't move hand or foot? Hot or cowld was ut?'

'Cold,' said Ortheris, 'up an' under the rib-jint. 'E come down flat.
Best for you 'e did.'

'Thrue, my son! This jam thing that I'm talkin' about lasted for five
minutes good, an' thin we got our arms clear an' wint in. I misremimber
exactly fwhat I did, but I didn't want Dinah to be a widdy at the
Depot. Thin, after some promishkuous hackin' we shtuck again, an' the
Tyrone behin' was callin' us dogs an' cowards an' all manner av names;
we barrin' their way.

'"Fwhat ails the Tyrone?" thinks I; "they've the makin's av a most
convanient fight here."

'A man behind me sez beseechful an' in a whisper:--"Let me get at thim!
For the Love av Mary give me room beside ye, ye tall man!"

'"An' who are you that's so anxious to be kilt?" sez I, widout turnin'
my head, for the long knives was dancin' in front like the sun on
Donegal Bay whin ut's rough.

'"We've seen our dead," he sez, squeezin' into me; "our dead that was
men two days gone! An' me that was his cousin by blood could not bring
Tim Coulan off! Let me get on," he sez, "let me get to thim or I'll
run ye through the back!"

'"My troth," thinks I, "if the Tyrone have seen their dead, God help
the Paythans this day!" An' thin I knew why the Oirish was ragin'
behind us as they was.

'I gave room to the man, an' he ran forward wid the Haymaker's Lift
on his bay'nit an' swung a Paythan clear off his feet by the belly-band
av the brute, an' the iron bruk at the lockin'-ring.

'"Tim Coulan'll slape easy to-night," sez he wid a grin; an' the next
minut his head was in two halves and he wint down grinnin' by sections.

'The Tyrone was pushin' an' pushin' in, an' our men was swearin' at
thim, an' Crook was workin' away in front av us all, his sword-arm
swingin' like a pump-handle an' his revolver spittin' like a cat. But
the strange thing av ut was the quiet that lay upon. 'Twas like a fight
in a drame--except for thim that was dead.

'Whin I gave room to the Oirishman I was expinded an' forlorn in my
inside. 'Tis a way I have, savin' your presince, Sorr, in action. "Let
me out, bhoys," sez I, backin' in among thim. "I'm going to be onwell!"
Faith they gave me room at the wurrud, though they would not ha' givin
room for all Hell wid the chill off. When I got clear, I was, savin'
your presince, Sorr, outragis sick bekaze I had dhrunk heavy that day.

'Well an' far out av harm was a Sargint av the Tyrone sittin' on the
little orf'cer bhoy who had stopped Crook from rowlin' the rocks. Oh,
he was a beautiful bhoy, an' the long black curses was slidin' out av
his innocint mouth like mornin'-jew from a rose!

'"Fwhat have you got there?" sez I to the Sargint.

'"Wan av Her Majesty's bantams wid his spurs up," sez he. "He's goin'
to Coort-martial me."

'"Let me go!" sez the little orf'cer bhoy. "Let me go and command my
men!" manin' thereby the Black Tyrone which was beyond any command--ay,
even av they had made the Divil a Field-orf'cer.

'"His father howlds my mother's cow-feed in Clonmel," sez the man that
was sittin' on him. "Will I go back to _his_ mother an' tell her that
I've let him throw himself away? Lie still, ye little pinch av dynamite,
an' Coort-martial me aftherwards."

"Good," sez I; "'tis the likes av him makes the likes av the
Commandher-in-Chief, but we must presarve thim. Fwhat d'you want to
do, Sorr?" sez I, very politeful.

'"Kill the beggars--kill the beggars!" he shqueaks; his big blue eyes
brimmin' wid tears.

'"An' how'll ye do that?" sez I. "You've shquibbed off your revolver
like a child wid a cracker; you can make no play wid that fine large
sword av yours; an' your hand's shakin' like an asp on a leaf. Lie
still an' grow," sez I.

'"Get back to your comp'ny," sez he; "you're insolint!"

'"All in good time," sez I, "but I'll have a dhrink first."

'Just thin Crook comes up, blue an' white all over where he wasn't red.

'"Wather!" sez he; "I'm dead wid drouth! Oh, but it's a gran' day!"

'He dhrank half a skinful, and the rest he tilts into his chest, an'
it fair hissed on the hairy hide av him. He sees the little orf'cer
bhoy undher the Sargint.

'"Fwhat's yonder?" sez he.

'"Mutiny, Sorr," sez the Sargint, an' the orf'cer bhoy begins pleadin'
pitiful to Crook to be let go: but divil a bit wud Crook budge.

'"Kape him there," he sez, "'tis no child's work this day. By the same
token," sez he, "I'll confishcate that iligant nickel-plated
scent-sprinkler av yours, for my own has been vomitin' dishgraceful!"

'The fork av his hand was black wid the backspit av the machine. So
he tuk the orf'cer bhoy's revolver. Ye may look, Sorr, by my faith,
_there's a dale more done in the field than iver gets into Field
Ordhers!_

'"Come on, Mulvaney," sez Crook; "is this a Coort-martial?" The two
av us wint back together into the mess an' the Paythans were still
standin' up. They was not _too_ impart'nint though, for the Tyrone was
callin' wan to another to remimber Tim Coulan.

'Crook stopped outside av the strife an' looked anxious, his eyes
rowlin' roun'.

'"Fwhat is ut, Sorr?" sez I; "can I get ye anything?"

'"Where's a bugler?" sez he.

'I wint into the crowd--our men was dhrawin' breath behin' the Tyrone
who was fightin' like sowls in tormint--an' prisintly I came acrost
little Frehan, our bugler bhoy, pokin' roun' among the best wid a rifle
an' bay'nit.

'"Is amusin' yoursilf fwhat you're paid for, ye limb?" sez I, catchin'
him by the scruff. "Come out av that an' attind to your duty," I sez;
but the bhoy was not pleased.

'"I've got wan," sez he, grinnin', "big as you, Mulvaney, an' fair
half as ugly. Let me go get another."

'I was dishplease dat the personability av that remark, so I tucks him
under my arm an' carries him to Crook who was watchin' how the fight
wint. Crook cuffs him till the bhoy cries, an' thin sez nothin' for
a whoile.

'The Paythans began to flicker onaisy, an' our men roared. "Opin ordher!
Double!" sez Crook. "Blow, child, blow for the honour of the British
Arrmy!"

'That bhoy blew like a typhoon, an' the Tyrone an' we opined out as
the Paythans broke, an' I saw that fwhat had gone before wud be kissin'
an' huggin' to fwhat was to come. We'd dhruv thim into a broad part
av the gut whin they gave, an' thin we opined out an' fair danced down
the valley, dhrivin' thim before us. Oh, 'twas lovely, an' stiddy,
too! There was the Sargints on the flanks av what was left av us,
kapin' touch, an' the fire was runnin' from flank to flank, an' the
Paythans was dhroppin'. We opined out wid the widenin' av the valley,
an' whin the valley narrowed we closed again like the shticks on a
lady's fan, an' at the far ind av the gut where they thried to stand,
we fair blew them off their feet, for we had expinded very little
ammunition by reason av the knife work.'

'Hi used thirty rounds goin' down that valley,' said Ortheris, 'an'
it was gentleman's work. Might 'a' done it in a white 'andkerchief an'
pink silk stockin's, that part. Hi was on in that piece.'

'You could ha' heard the Tyrone yellin' a mile away,' said Mulvaney,
'an' 'twas all their Sargints cud do to get thim off. They was
mad--mad--mad! Crook sits down in the quiet that fell whin we had gone
down the valley, an' covers his face wid his hands. Prisintly we all
came back again accordin' to our natures and disposishins, for they,
mark you, show through the hide av a man in that hour.

'"Bhoys! bhoys!" sez Crook to himself. "I misdoubt we could ha' engaged
at long range an' saved betther men than me." He looked at our dead
an' said no more.

'"Captain dear," sez a man av the Tyrone, comin' up wid his mouth
bigger than iver his mother kissed ut, spittin' blood like a whale;
"Captain dear," sez he, "if wan or two in the shtalls have been
discommoded, the gallery enjoyed the performinces av a Roshus."

'Thin I knew that man for the Dublin dock-rat he was--wan av the bhoys
that made the lessee av Silver's Theatre gray before his time wid
tearin' out the bowils av the benches an' t'rowin' thim into the pit.
So I passed the wurrud that I knew when I was in the Tyrone an' we lay
in Dublin. "I don't know who 'twas," I whispers, "an' I don't care,
but anyways I'll knock the face av you, Tim Kelly."

'"Eyah!" sez the man, "was you there too? We'll call ut Silver's
Theatre." Half the Tyrone, knowin' the ould place, tuk it up: so we
called ut Silver's Theatre.

'The little orf'cer bhoy av the Tyrone was thremblin' an' cryin'. He
had no heart for the Coort-martials that he talked so big upon. "Ye'll
do well later," sez Crook, very quiet, "for not bein' allowed to kill
yourself for amusemint."

'"I'm a dishgraced man!" sez the little orf'cer bhoy.

'"Put me undher arrest, Sorr, if you will, but, by my sowl, I'd do ut
again sooner than face your mother wid you dead," sez the Sargint that
had sat on his head, standin' to attention an' salutin'. But the young
wan only cried as tho' his little heart was breakin'.

'Thin another man av the Tyrone came up, wid the fog av fightin' on
him.'

'The what, Mulvaney?'

'Fog av fightin'. You know, Sorr, that, like makin' love, ut takes
each man diff'rint. Now I can't help bein' powerful sick whin I'm in
action. Orth'ris, here, niver stops swearin' from ind to ind, an' the
only time that Learoyd opins his mouth to sing is whin he is messin'
wid other people's heads; for he's a dhirty fighter is Jock. Recruities
sometime cry, an' sometime they don't know fwhat they do, an' sometime
they are all for cuttin' throats an' such like dirtiness; but some men
get heavy-dead-dhrunk on the fightin'. This man was. He was staggerin',
an' his eyes were half shut, an' we cud hear him dhraw breath twinty
yards away. He sees the little orf'cer bhoy, an' comes up, talkin'
thick an' drowsy to himsilf. "Blood the young whelp!" he sez; "blood
the young whelp"; an' wid that he threw up his arms, shpun roun', an'
dropped at our feet, dead as a Paythan, an' there was niver sign or
scratch on him. They said 'twas his heart was rotten, but oh, 'twas
a quare thing to see!

'Thin we wint to bury our dead, for we wud not lave thim to the
Paythans, an' in movin' among the haythen we nearly lost that little
orf'cer bhoy. He was for givin' wan divil wather and layin' him aisy
against a rock. "Be careful, Sorr," sez I; "a wounded Paythan's worse
than a live wan." My troth, before the words was out of my mouth, the
man on the ground fires at the orf'cer bhoy lanin' over him, an' I saw
the helmit fly. I dropped the butt on the face av the man an' tuk his
pistol. The little orf'cer bhoy turned very white, for the hair av
half his head was singed away.

'"I tould you so, Sorr!" sez I; an', afther that, whin he wanted to
help a Paythan I stud wid the muzzle contagious to the ear. They dare
not do anythin' but curse. The Tyrone was growlin' like dogs over a
bone that had been taken away too soon, for they had seen their dead
an' they wanted to kill ivry sowl on the ground. Crook tould thim that
he'd blow the hide off any man that misconducted himself; but, seeing
that ut was the first time the Tyrone had iver seen their dead, I do
not wondher they were on the sharp. 'Tis a shameful sight! Whin I first
saw ut I wud niver ha' given quarter to any man north of the
Khaibar--no, nor woman either, for the women used to come out afther
dhark--Auggrh!

'Well, evenshually we buried our dead an' tuk away our wounded, an'
come over the brow av the hills to see the Scotchies an' the Gurkeys
taking tay with the Paythans in bucketsfuls. We were a gang av dissolute
ruffians, for the blood had caked the dust, an' the sweat had cut the
cake, an' our bay'nits was hangin' like butchers' steels betune ur
legs, an' most av us were marked one way or another.

'A Staff Orf'cer man, clean as a new rifle, rides up an' sez: "What
damned scarecrows are you?"

'"A comp'ny av Her Majesty's Black Tyrone an' wan av the Ould Rig'mint,"
sez Crook very quiet, givin' our visitors the flure as 'twas.

'"Oh!" sez the Staff Orf'cer; "did you dislodge that Reserve?"

'"No!" sez Crook, an' the Tyrone laughed.

'"Thin fwhat the divil have ye done?"

'"Disthroyed ut," sez Crook, an' he took us on, but not before Toomey
that was in the Tyrone sez aloud, his voice somewhere in his stummick:
"Fwhat in the name av misfortune does this parrit widout a tail mane
by shtoppin' the road av his betthers?"

'The Staff Orf'cer wint blue, an' Toomey makes him pink by changin'
to the voice av a minowderin' woman an' sayin': "Come an' kiss me,
Major dear, for me husband's at the wars an' I'm all alone at the
Depot."

'The Staff Orf'cer wint away, an' I cud see Crook's shoulthers shakin'.

'His Corp'ril checks Toomey. "Lave me alone," sez Toomey, widout a
wink. "I was his batman before he was married an' he knows fwhat I
mane, av you don't. There's nothin' like livin' in the hoight av
society." D'you remimber that, Orth'ris!'

'Hi do. Toomey, 'e died in 'orspital, next week it was, 'cause I bought
'arf his kit; an' I remember after that--'

'GUARRD, TURN OUT!'

The Relief had come; it was four o'clock. 'I'll catch a kyart for you,
Sorr,' said Mulvaney, diving hastily into his accoutrements. 'Come up
to the top av the Fort an' we'll pershue our invistigations into
M'Grath's shtable.' The relieved Guard strolled round the main bastion
on its way to the swimming-bath, and Learoyd grew almost talkative.
Ortheris looked into the Fort ditch and across the plain. 'Ho! it's
weary waitin' for Ma-ary!' he hummed; 'but I'd like to kill some more
bloomin' Paythans before my time's up. War! Bloody war! North, East,
South, and West.'

'Amen,' said Learoyd slowly.

'Fwhat's here?' said Mulvaney, checking at a blur of white by the foot
of the old sentry-box. He stooped and touched it. 'It's Norah--Norah
M'Taggart! Why, Nonie darlin', fwhat are ye doin' out av your mother's
bed at this time?'

The two-year-old child of Sergeant M'Taggart must have wandered for
a breath of cool air to the very verge of the parapet of the Fort
ditch. Her tiny night-shift was gathered into a wisp round her neck
and she moaned in her sleep. 'See there!' said Mulvaney; 'poor lamb!
Look at the heat-rash on the innocint skin av her. 'Tis hard--crool
hard even for us. Fwhat must it be for these? Wake up, Nonie, your
mother will be woild about you. Begad, the child might ha' fallen into
the ditch!'

He picked her up in the growing light, and set her on his shoulder,
and her fair curls touched the grizzled stubble of his temples. Ortheris
and Learoyd followed snapping their fingers, while Norah smiled at
them a sleepy smile. Then carolled Mulvaney, clear as a lark, dancing
the baby on his arm--

  'If any young man should marry you,
  Say nothin' about the joke;
  That iver ye slep' in a sinthry-box,
  Wrapped up in a soldier's cloak.'

'Though, on my sowl, Nonie,' he said gravely, 'there was not much cloak
about you. Niver mind, you won't dhress like this ten years to come.
Kiss your friends an' run along to your mother.'

Nonie, set down close to the Married Quarters, nodded with the quiet
obedience of the soldier's child, but, ere she pattered off over the
flagged path, held up her lips to be kissed by the Three Musketeers.
Ortheris wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and swore
sentimentally; Learoyd turned pink; and the two walked away together.
The Yorkshireman lifted up his voice and gave in thunder the chorus
of _The Sentry-Box_, while Ortheris piped at his side.

''Bin to a bloomin' sing-song, you two?' said the Artilleryman, who
was taking his cartridge down to the Morning Gun. 'You're over merry
for these dashed days.'

  'I bid ye take care o' the brat, said he,
  For it comes of a noble race,'

Learoyd bellowed. The voices died out in the swimming-bath.

'Oh, Terence!' I said, dropping into Mulvaney's speech, when we were
alone, 'it's you that have the Tongue!'

He looked at me wearily; his eyes were sunk in his head, and his face
was drawn and white. 'Eyah!' said he; 'I've blandandhered thim through
the night somehow, but can thim that helps others help thimselves?
Answer me that, Sorr!'

And over the bastions of Fort Amara broke the pitiless day.




IN THE MATTER OF A PRIVATE

      Hurrah! hurrah! a soldier's life for me!
      Shout, boys, shout! for it makes you jolly and free.
              _The Ramrod Corps._

People who have seen, say that one of the quaintest spectacles of human
frailty is an outbreak of hysterics in a girls' school. It starts
without warning, generally on a hot afternoon, among the elder pupils.
A girl giggles till the giggle gets beyond control. Then she throws
up her head, and cries, '_Honk, honk, honk,_' like a wild goose, and
tears mix with the laughter. If the mistress be wise, she will rap out
something severe at this point to check matters. If she be
tender-hearted, and send for a drink of water, the chances are largely
in favour of another girl laughing at the afflicted one and herself
collapsing. Thus the trouble spreads, and may end in half of what
answers to the Lower Sixth of a boys' school rocking and whooping
together. Given a week of warm weather, two stately promenades per
diem, a heavy mutton and rice meal in the middle of the day, a certain
amount of nagging from the teachers, and a few other things, some
amazing effects develop. At least, this is what folk say who have had
experience.

Now, the Mother Superior of a Convent and the Colonel of a British
Infantry Regiment would be justly shocked at any comparison being made
between their respective charges. But it is a fact that, under certain
circumstances, Thomas in bulk can be worked up into ditthering, rippling
hysteria. He does not weep, but he shows his trouble unmistakably, and
the consequences get into the newspapers, and all the good people who
hardly know a Martini from a Snider say: 'Take away the brute's
ammunition!'

Thomas isn't a brute, and his business, which is to look after the
virtuous people, demands that he shall have his ammunition to his hand.
He doesn't wear silk stockings, and he really ought to be supplied
with a new Adjective to help him to express his opinions: but, for all
that, he is a great man. If you call him 'the heroic defender of the
national honour' one day, and a 'brutal and licentious soldiery' the
next, you naturally bewilder him, and he looks upon you with suspicion.
There is nobody to speak for Thomas except people who have theories
to work off on him; and nobody understands Thomas except Thomas, and
he does not always know what is the matter with himself.

That is the prologue. This is the story:--

Corporal Slane was engaged to be married to Miss Jhansi M'Kenna, whose
history is well known in the regiment and elsewhere. He had his
Colonel's permission, and, being popular with the men, every arrangement
had been made to give the wedding what Private Ortheris called 'eeklar.'
It fell in the heart of the hot weather, and, after the wedding, Slane
was going up to the Hills with the bride. None the less, Slane's
grievance was that the affair would be only a hired-carriage wedding,
and he felt that the 'eeklar' of that was meagre. Miss M'Kenna did not
care so much. The Sergeant's wife was helping her to make her
wedding-dress, and she was very busy. Slane was, just then, the only
moderately contented man in barracks. All the rest were more or less
miserable.

And they had so much to make them happy, too. All their work was over
at eight in the morning, and for the rest of the day they could lie
on their backs and smoke Canteen-plug and swear at the punkah-coolies.
They enjoyed a fine, full flesh meal in the middle of the day, and
then threw themselves down on their cots and sweated and slept till
it was cool enough to go out with their 'towny,' whose vocabulary
contained less than six hundred words, and the Adjective, and whose
views on every conceivable question they had heard many times before.

There was the Canteen, of course, and there was the Temperance Room
with the second-hand papers in it; but a man of any profession cannot
read for eight hours a day in a temperature of 96 degrees or 98 degrees
in the shade, running up sometimes to 103 degrees at midnight. Very
few men, even though they get a pannikin of flat, stale, muddy beer
and hide it under their cots, can continue drinking for six hours a
day. One man tried, but he died, and nearly the whole regiment went
to his funeral because it gave them something to do. It was too early
for the excitement of fever or cholera. The men could only wait and
wait and wait, and watch the shadow of the barrack creeping across the
blinding white dust. That was a gay life.

They lounged about cantonments--it was too hot for any sort of game,
and almost too hot for vice--and fuddled themselves in the evening,
and filled themselves to distension with the healthy nitrogenous food
provided for them, and the more they stoked the less exercise they
took and more explosive they grew. Then tempers began to wear away,
and men fell a-brooding over insults real or imaginary, for they had
nothing else to think of. The tone of the repartees changed and
instead of saying light-heartedly: 'I'll knock your silly face in.'
men grew laboriously polite and hinted that the cantonments were not
big enough for themselves and their enemy, and that there would be
more space for one of the two in another Place.

It may have been the Devil who arranged the thing, but the fact of the
case is that Losson had for a long time been worrying Simmons in an
aimless way. It gave him occupation. The two had their cots side by
side, and would sometimes spend a long afternoon swearing at each
other; but Simmons was afraid of Losson and dared not challenge him
to a fight. He thought over the words in the hot still nights, and
half the hate he felt towards Losson he vented on the wretched
punkah-coolie.

Losson bought a parrot in the bazar, and put it into a little cage,
and lowered the cage into the cool darkness of a well, and sat on the
well-curb, shouting bad language down to the parrot. He taught it to
say: 'Simmons, ye _so-oor_,' which means swine, and several other
things entirely unfit for publication. He was a big gross man, and he
shook like a jelly when the parrot had the sentence correctly. Simmons,
however, shook with rage, for all the room were laughing at him--the
parrot was such a disreputable puff of green feathers and it looked
so human when it chattered. Losson used to sit, swinging his fat legs,
on the side of the cot, and ask the parrot what it thought of Simmons.
The parrot would answer: 'Simmons, ye _so-oor_.' 'Good boy,' Losson
used to say, scratching the parrot's head; 'ye 'ear that, Sim?' And
Simmons used to turn over on his stomach and make answer: 'I 'ear.
Take 'eed _you_ don't 'ear something one of these days.'

In the restless nights, after he had been asleep all day, fits of blind
rage came upon Simmons and held him till he trembled all over, while
he thought in how many different ways he would slay Losson. Sometimes
he would picture himself trampling the life out of the man, with heavy
ammunition-boots, and at others smashing in his face with the butt,
and at others jumping on his shoulders and dragging the head back till
the neckbone cracked. Then his mouth would feel hot and fevered, and
he would reach out for another sup of the beer in the pannikin.

But the fancy that came to him most frequently and stayed with him
longest was one connected with the great roll of fat under Lesson's
right ear. He noticed it first on a moonlight night, and thereafter
it was always before his eyes. It was a fascinating roll of fat. A man
could get his hand upon it and tear away one side of the neck; or he
could place the muzzle of a rifle on it and blow away all the head in
a flash. Losson had no right to be sleek and contented and well-to-do,
when he, Simmons, was the butt of the room. Some day, perhaps, he would
show those who laughed at the 'Simmons, ye _so-oor_' joke, that he was
as good as the rest, and held a man's life in the crook of his
forefinger. When Losson snored, Simmons hated him more bitterly than
ever. Why should Losson be able to sleep when Simmons had to stay awake
hour after hour, tossing and turning on the tapes, with the dull liver
pain gnawing into his right side and his head throbbing and aching
after Canteen? He thought over this for many many nights, and the world
became unprofitable to him. He even blunted his naturally fine appetite
with beer and tobacco; and all the while the parrot talked at and made
a mock of him.

The heat continued and the tempers wore away more quickly than before.
A Sergeant's wife died of heat-apoplexy in the night, and the rumour
ran abroad that it was cholera. Men rejoiced openly, hoping that it
would spread and send them into camp. But that was a false alarm.

It was late on a Tuesday evening, and the men were waiting in the deep
double verandas for 'Last Posts,' when Simmons went to the box at the
foot of his bed, took out his pipe, and slammed the lid down with a
bang that echoed through the deserted barrack like the crack of a
rifle. Ordinarily speaking, the men would have taken no notice; but
their nerves were fretted to fiddle-strings. They jumped up, and three
or four clattered into the barrack-room only to find Simmons kneeling
by his box.

'Ow! It's you, is it?' they said and laughed foolishly. 'We thought
'twas--'

Simmons rose slowly. If the accident had so shaken his fellows, what
would not the reality do?

'You thought it was--did you? And what makes you think?' he said,
lashing himself into madness as he went on; 'to Hell with your thinking,
ye dirty spies.'

'Simmons, ye _so-oor_,' chuckled the parrot in the veranda sleepily,
recognising a well-known voice. Now that was absolutely all.

The tension snapped. Simmons fell back on the arm-rack
deliberately,--the men were at the far end of the room,--and took out
his rifle and packet of ammunition. 'Don't go playing the goat, Sim!'
said Losson. 'Put it down,' but there was a quaver in his voice. Another
man stooped, slipped his boot and hurled it at Simmons's head. The
prompt answer was a shot which, fired at random, found its billet in
Losson's throat. Losson fell forward without a word, and the others
scattered.

'You thought it was!' yelled Simmons. 'You're drivin' me to it! I tell
you you're drivin' me to it! Get up, Losson, an' don't lie shammin'
there--you an' your blasted parrit that druv me to it!'

But there was an unaffected reality about Losson's pose that showed
Simmons what he had done. The men were still clamouring in the veranda.
Simmons appropriated two more packets of ammunition and ran into the
moonlight, muttering: 'I'll make a night of it. Thirty roun's, an' the
last for myself. Take you that, you dogs!'

He dropped on one knee and fired into the brown of the men on the
veranda, but the bullet flew high, and landed in the brickwork with
a vicious _phwit_ that made some of the younger ones turn pale. It is,
as musketry theorists observe, one thing to fire and another to be
fired at.

Then the instinct of the chase flared up. The news spread from barrack
to barrack, and the men doubled out intent on the capture of Simmons,
the wild beast, who was heading for the Cavalry parade-ground, stopping
now and again to send back a shot and a curse in the direction of his
pursuers.

'I'll learn you to spy on me!' he shouted; 'I'll learn you to give me
dorg's names! Come on, the 'ole lot o' you! Colonel John Anthony Deever,
C. B.!'--he turned towards the Infantry Mess and shook his rifle--'you
think yourself the devil of a man--but I tell you that if you put your
ugly old carcass outside o' that door, I'll make you the poorest-lookin'
man in the army. Come out, Colonel John Anthony Deever, C. B.! Come
out and see me practiss on the rainge. I'm the crack shot of the 'ole
bloomin' battalion.' In proof of which statement Simmons fired at the
lighted windows of the mess-house.

'Private Simmons, E Comp'ny, on the Cavalry p'rade-ground, Sir, with
thirty rounds,' said a Sergeant breathlessly to the Colonel. 'Shootin'
right and lef', Sir. Shot Private Losson. What's to be done, Sir?'

Colonel John Anthony Deever, C. B., sallied out, only to be saluted
by a spurt of dust at his feet.

'Pull up!' said the Second in Command; 'I don't want my step in that
way, Colonel. He's as dangerous as a mad dog.'

'Shoot him like one, then,' said the Colonel bitterly, 'if he won't
take his chance. _My_ regiment, too! If it had been the Towheads I
could have understood.'

Private Simmons had occupied a strong position near a well on the edge
of the parade-ground, and was defying the regiment to come on. The
regiment was not anxious to comply, for there is small honour in being
shot by a fellow-private. Only Corporal Slane, rifle in hand, threw
himself down on the ground, and wormed his way towards the well.

'Don't shoot,' said he to the men round him; 'like as not you'll 'it
me. I'll catch the beggar, livin'.'

Simmons ceased shouting for a while, and the noise of trap-wheels could
be heard across the plain. Major Oldyne, Commanding the Horse Battery,
was coming back from a dinner in the Civil Lines; was driving after
his usual custom--that is to say, as fast as the horse could go.

'A orf'cer! A blooming spangled orf'cer!' shrieked Simmons; 'I'll make
a scarecrow of that orf'cer!' The trap stopped.

'What's this?' demanded the Major of Gunners. 'You there, drop your
rifle.'

'Why, it's Jerry Blazes! I ain't got no quarrel with you, Jerry Blazes.
Pass frien', an' all's well!'

But Jerry Blazes had not the faintest intention of passing a dangerous
murderer. He was, as his adoring Battery swore long and fervently,
without knowledge of fear, and they were surely the best judges, for
Jerry Blazes, it was notorious, had done his possible to kill a man
each time the Battery went out.

He walked towards Simmons, with the intention of rushing him, and
knocking him down.

'Don't make me do it, Sir,' said Simmons; 'I ain't got nothing agin
you. Ah! you would?'--the Major broke into a run--'Take that then!'

The Major dropped with a bullet through his shoulder, and Simmons stood
over him. He had lost the satisfaction of killing Losson in the desired
way: but here was a helpless body to his hand. Should he slip in another
cartridge, and blow off the head, or with the butt smash in the white
face? He stopped to consider, and a cry went up from the far side of
the parade-ground: 'He's killed Jerry Blazes!' But in the shelter of
the well-pillars Simmons was safe, except when he stepped out to fire.
'I'll blow yer 'andsome 'ead off, Jerry Blazes,' said Simmons
reflectively. 'Six an' three is nine an' one is ten, an' that leaves
me another nineteen, an' one for myself.' He tugged at the string of
the second packet of ammunition. Corporal Slane crawled out of the
shadow of a bank into the moonlight.

'I see you!' said Simmons. 'Come a bit furder on an' I'll do for you.'

'I'm comin',' said Corporal Slane briefly; 'you've done a bad day's
work, Sim. Come out 'ere an' come back with me.'

'Come to--,' laughed Simmons, sending a cartridge home with his thumb.
'Not before I've settled you an' Jerry Blazes.'

The Corporal was lying at full length in the dust of the parade-ground,
a rifle under him. Some of the less-cautious men in the distance
shouted: 'Shoot 'im! Shoot 'im, Slane!'

'You move 'and or foot, Slane,' said Simmons, 'an' I'll kick Jerry
Blazes' 'ead in, and shoot you after.'

'I ain't movin',' said the Corporal, raising his head; 'you daren't
'it a man on 'is legs. Let go o' Jerry Blazes an' come out o' that
with your fistes. Come an' 'it me. You daren't, you bloomin'
dog-shooter!'

'I dare.'

'You lie, you man-sticker. You sneakin' Sheeny butcher, you lie. See
there!' Slane kicked the rifle away, and stood up in the peril of his
life. 'Come on, now!'

The temptation was more than Simmons could resist, for the Corporal
in his white clothes offered a perfect mark.

'Don't misname me,' shouted Simmons, firing as he spoke. The shot
missed, and the shooter, blind with rage, threw his rifle down and
rushed at Slane from the protection of the well. Within striking
distance, he kicked savagely at Slane's stomach, but the weedy Corporal
knew something of Simmons's weakness, and knew, too, the deadly guard
for that kick. Bowing forward and drawing up his right leg till the
heel of the right foot was set some three inches above the inside of
the left knee-cap, he met the blow standing on one leg--exactly as
Gonds stand when they meditate--and ready for the fall that would
follow. There was an oath, the Corporal fell over to his own left as
shinbone met shinbone, and the Private collapsed, his right leg broken
an inch above the ankle.

''Pity you don't know that guard, Sim,' said Slane, spitting out the
dust as he rose. Then raising his voice--'Come an' take him orf. I've
bruk 'is leg.' This was not strictly true, for the Private had
accomplished his own downfall, since it is the special merit of that
leg-guard that the harder the kick the greater the kicker's
discomfiture.

Slane walked to Jerry Blazes and hung over him with ostentatious
anxiety, while Simmons, weeping with pain, was carried away. ''Ope you
ain't 'urt badly, Sir,' said Slane. The Major had fainted, and there
was an ugly, ragged hole through the top of his arm. Slane knelt down
and murmured: 'S'elp me, I believe 'e's dead. Well, if that ain't my
blooming luck all over!'

But the Major was destined to lead his Battery afield for many a long
day with unshaken nerve. He was removed, and nursed and petted into
convalescence, while the Battery discussed the wisdom of capturing
Simmons, and blowing him from a gun. They idolised their Major, and
his reappearance on parade brought about a scene nowhere provided for
in the Army Regulations.

Great, too, was the glory that fell to Slane's share. The Gunners would
have made him drunk thrice a day for at least a fortnight. Even the
Colonel of his own regiment complimented him upon his coolness, and
the local paper called him a hero. These things did not puff him up.
When the Major offered him money and thanks, the virtuous Corporal
took the one and put aside the other. But he had a request to make and
prefaced it with many a 'Beg y' pardon, Sir.' Could the Major see his
way to letting the Slane-M'Kenna wedding be adorned by the presence
of four Battery horses to pull a hired barouche? The Major could, and
so could the Battery. Excessively so. It was a gorgeous wedding.



'Wot did I do it for?' said Corporal Slane. 'For the 'orses o' course.
Jhansi ain't a beauty to look at, but I wasn't goin' to 'ave a hired
turn-out. Jerry Blazes? If I 'adn't 'a' wanted something, Sim might
ha' blowed Jerry Blazes' blooming 'ead into Hirish stew for aught I'd
'a' cared.'

And they hanged Private Simmons--hanged him as high as Haman in hollow
square of the regiment; and the Colonel said it was Drink; and the
Chaplain was sure it was the Devil; and Simmons fancied it was both,
but he didn't know, and only hoped his fate would be a warning to his
companions; and half a dozen 'intelligent publicists' wrote six
beautiful leading articles on 'The Prevalence of Crime in the Army.'

But not a soul thought of comparing the 'bloody-minded Simmons' to the
squawking, gaping schoolgirl with which this story opens.




BLACK JACK

  To the wake av Tim O'Hara
  Came company,
  All St. Patrick's Alley
  Was there to see.
        _Robert Buchanan_.

As the Three Musketeers share their silver, tobacco, and liquor
together, as they protect each other in barracks or camp, and as they
rejoice together over the joy of one, so do they divide their sorrows.
When Ortheris's irrepressible tongue has brought him into cells for
a season, or Learoyd has run amok through his kit and accoutrements,
or Mulvaney has indulged in strong waters, and under their influence
reproved his Commanding Officer, you can see the trouble in the faces
of the untouched two. And the rest of the regiment know that comment
or jest is unsafe. Generally the three avoid Orderly Room and the
Corner Shop that follows, leaving both to the young bloods who have
not sown their wild oats; but there are occasions--

For instance, Ortheris was sitting on the drawbridge of the main gate
of Fort Amara, with his hands in his pockets and his pipe, bowl down,
in his mouth. Learoyd was lying at full length on the turf of the
glacis, kicking his heels in the air, and I came round the corner and
asked for Mulvaney.

Ortheris spat into the ditch and shook his head. 'No good seein' 'im
now,' said Ortheris; ''e's a bloomin' camel. Listen.'

I heard on the flags of the veranda opposite to the cells, which are
close to the Guard-Room, a measured step that I could have identified
in the tramp of an army. There were twenty paces crescendo, a pause,
and then twenty _diminuendo_.

'That's 'im,' said Ortheris; 'my Gawd, that's 'im! All for a bloomin'
button you could see your face in an' a bit o' lip that a bloomin'
Harkangel would 'a' guv back.'

Mulvaney was doing pack-drill--was compelled, that is to say, to walk
up and down for certain hours in full marching order, with rifle,
bayonet, ammunition, knapsack, and overcoat. And his offence was being
dirty on parade! I nearly fell into the Fort Ditch with astonishment
and wrath, for Mulvaney is the smartest man that ever mounted guard,
and would as soon think of turning out uncleanly as of dispensing with
his trousers.

'Who was the Sergeant that checked him?' I asked.

'Mullins, o' course,' said Ortheris. 'There ain't no other man would
whip 'im on the peg so. But Mullins ain't a man.' E's a dirty little
pigscraper, that's wot 'e is.'

'What did Mulvaney say? He's not the make of man to take that quietly.'

'Said! Bin better for 'im if 'e'd shut 'is mouth. Lord, ow we laughed!
"Sargint," 'e sez, "ye say I'm dirty. Well," sez 'e, "when your wife
lets you blow your own nose for yourself, perhaps you'll know wot dirt
is. You're himperfectly eddicated, Sargint," sez 'e, an' then we fell
in. But after p'rade, 'e was up an' Mullins was swearin' 'imself black
in the face at Ord'ly Room that Mulvaney 'ad called 'im a swine an'
Lord knows wot all. You know Mullins. 'E'll 'ave 'is 'ead broke in one
o' these days. 'E's too big a bloomin' liar for ord'nary consumption.
"Three hours' can an' kit," sez the Colonel; "not for bein' dirty on
p'rade, but for 'avin' said somethin' to Mullins, tho' I do not believe,
"sez 'e, "you said wot 'e said you said. "An' Mulvaney fell away sayin'
nothin'. You know 'e never speaks to the Colonel for fear o' gettin'
'imself fresh copped.'

Mullins, a very young and very much married Sergeant, whose manners
were partly the result of innate depravity and partly of imperfectly
digested Board School, came over the bridge, and most rudely asked
Ortheris what he was doing.

'Me?' said Ortheris. 'Ow! I'm waiting for my C'mission. 'Seed it
comin' along yit?'

Mullins turned purple and passed on. There was the sound of a gentle
chuckle from the glacis where Learoyd lay.

''E expects to get 'is C'mission some day,' explained Ortheris;' Gawd
'elp the Mess that 'ave to put their 'ands into the same kiddy as 'im!
Wot time d'you make it, Sir? Fower! Mulvaney'll be out in 'arf an hour.
You don't want to buy a dorg, Sir, do you? A pup you can trust--'arf
Rampore by the Colonel's grey-'ound.'

'Ortheris,' I answered sternly, for I knew what was in his mind,'do
you mean to say that--'

'I didn't mean to arx money o' you, any'ow,' said Ortheris; 'I'd 'a'
sold you the dorg good an' cheap, but--but--I know Mulvaney'll want
somethin' after we've walked 'im orf, an' I ain't got nothin', nor 'e
'asn't neither. I'd sooner sell you the dorg, Sir. 'S trewth I would!'

A shadow fell on the drawbridge, and Ortheris began to rise into the
air, lifted by a huge hand upon his collar.

'Onything but t' braass,' said Learoyd quietly, as he held the Londoner
over the ditch. 'Onything but t' braass, Orth'ris, ma son! Ah've got
one rupee eight annas of ma own.' He showed two coins, and replaced
Ortheris on the drawbridge rail.

'Very good,' I said;' where are you going to?'

'Goin' to walk 'im orf wen 'e comes out--two miles or three or fower,'
said Ortheris.

The footsteps within ceased. I heard the dull thud of a knapsack falling
on a bedstead, followed by the rattle of arms. Ten minutes later,
Mulvaney, faultlessly dressed, his lips tight and his face as black
as a thunderstorm, stalked into the sunshine on the drawbridge. Learoyd
and Ortheris sprang from my side and closed in upon him, both leaning
towards as horses lean upon the pole. In an instant they had disappeared
down the sunken road to the cantonments, and I was left alone. Mulvaney
had not seen fit to recognise me; so I knew that his trouble must be
heavy upon him.

I climbed one of the bastions and watched the figures of the Three
Musketeers grow smaller and smaller across the plain. They were walking
as fast as they could put foot to the ground, and their heads were
bowed. They fetched a great compass round the parade-ground, skirted
the Cavalry lines, and vanished in the belt of trees that fringes the
low land by the river.

I followed slowly, and sighted them--dusty, sweating, but still keeping
up their long, swinging tramp--on the river bank. They crashed through
the Forest Reserve, headed towards the Bridge of Boats, and presently
established themselves on the bow of one of the pontoons. I rode
cautiously till I saw three puffs of white smoke rise and die out in
the clear evening air, and knew that peace had come again. At the
bridge-head they waved me forward with gestures of welcome.

'Tie up your 'orse,' shouted Ortheris, 'an' come on, Sir. We're all
goin' 'home in this 'ere bloomin' boat.

From the bridge-head to the Forest Officer's bungalow is but a step.
The mess-man was there, and would see that a man held my horse. Did
the Sahib require aught else--a peg, or beer? Ritchie Sahib had left
half a dozen bottles of the latter, but since the Sahib was a friend
of Ritchie Sahib, and he, the mess-man, was a poor man--

I gave my order quietly, and returned to the bridge. Mulvaney had taken
off his boots, and was dabbling his toes in the water; Learoyd was
lying on his back on the pontoon; and Ortheris was pretending to row
with a big bamboo.

'I'm an ould fool,' said Mulvaney, reflectively,'dhrag-gin' you two
out here bekaze I was undher the Black Dog--sulkin' like a child. Me
that was soldierin' when Mullins, an' be damned to him, was shquealin'
on a counterpin for five shillin' a week--an' that not paid! Bhoys,
I've took you five miles out av natural pevarsity. Phew!'

'Wot's the odds so long as you're 'appy?' said Ortheris, applying
himself afresh to the bamboo. 'As well 'ere as anywhere else.'

Learoyd held up a rupee and an eight-anna bit, and shook his head
sorrowfully. 'Five mile from t' Canteen, all along o' Mulvaney's
blaasted pride.'

'I know ut,' said Mulvaney penitently. 'Why will ye come wid me? An'
yet I wud be mortial sorry if ye did not--any time--though I am ould
enough to know betther. But I will do penance. I will take a dhrink
av wather.'

Ortheris squeaked shrilly. The butler of the Forest bungalow was
standing near the railings with a basket, uncertain how to clamber
down to the pontoon. 'Might 'a' know'd you'd 'a' got liquor out o'
bloomin' desert, Sir,' said Ortheris, gracefully, to me. Then to the
mess-man: 'Easy with them there bottles. They're worth their weight
in gold. Jock, ye long-armed beggar, get out o' that an' hike 'em
down.'

Learoyd had the basket on the pontoon in an instant, and the Three
Musketeers gathered round it with dry lips. They drank my health in
due and ancient form, and thereafter tobacco tasted sweeter than ever.
They absorbed all the beer, and disposed themselves in picturesque
attitudes to admire the setting sun--no man speaking for a while.

Mulvaney's head dropped upon his chest, and we thought that he was
asleep.

'What on earth did you come so far for?' I whispered to Ortheris.

'To walk 'im orf, o' course. When 'e's been checked we allus walks 'im
orf. 'E ain't fit to be spoke to those times--nor 'e ain't fit to
leave alone neither. So we takes 'im till 'e is.'

Mulvaney raised his head, and stared straight into the sunset. 'I had
my rifle,' said he dreamily,'an' I had my bay'nit, an' Mullins came
round the corner, an' he looked in my face an' grinned dishpiteful.
"_You_ can't blow your own nose," sez he. Now, I cannot tell fwhat
Mullins's expayrience may ha' been, but, Mother av God, he was nearer
to his death that minut' than I have iver been to mine--and that's
less than the thicknuss av a hair!'

'Yes,' said Ortheris calmly, 'you'd look fine with all your buttons
took orf, an' the Band in front o' you, walkin' roun' slow time. We're
both front-rank men, me an' Jock, when the rig'mint's in 'ollow square.
Bloomin' fine you'd look. "The Lord giveth an' the Lord taketh
awai,--Heasy with that there drop!--Blessed be the naime o' the Lord,"'
he gulped in a quaint and suggestive fashion.

'Mullins! Wot's Mullins?' said Learoyd slowly. 'Ah'd take a coomp'ny
o' Mullinses-ma hand behind me. Sitha, Mulvaney, don't be a fool.'

'_You_ were not checked for fwhat you did not do, an' made a mock av
afther. 'Twas for less than that the Tyrone wud ha' sent O'Hara to
hell, instid av lettin' him go by his own choosin', whin Rafferty shot
him,' retorted Mulvaney.

'And who stopped the Tyrone from doing it?' I asked.

'That ould fool who's sorry he didn't stick the pig Mullins.' His head
dropped again. When he raised it he shivered and put his hands on the
shoulders of his two companions.

'Ye've walked the Divil out av me, bhoys,' said he.

Ortheris shot out the red-hot dottel of his pipe on the back of the
hairy fist. 'They say 'Ell's 'otter than that,' said he, as Mulvaney
swore aloud. 'You be warned so. Look yonder!'--he pointed across the
river to a ruined temple--'Me an' you an' _'im'_--he indicated me by
a jerk of his head--'was there one day when Hi made a bloomin' show
o' myself. You an' 'im stopped me doin' such--an' Hi was on'y wishful
for to desert. You are makin' a bigger bloomin' show o' yourself now.'

'Don't mind him, Mulvaney,' I said; 'Dinah Shadd won't let you hang
yourself yet awhile, and you don't intend to try it either. Let's hear
about the Tyrone and O'Hara. Rafferty shot him for fooling with his
wife. What happened before that?'

'There's no fool like an ould fool. You know you can do anythin' wid
me whin I'm talkin'. Did I say I wud like to cut Mullins's liver out?
I deny the imputashin, for fear that Orth'ris here wud report me--Ah!
You wud tip me into the river, wud you? Sit quiet, little man. Anyways,
Mullins is not worth the trouble av an extry p'rade, an' I will trate
him wid outrajis contimpt. The Tyrone an' O'Hara! O'Hara an' the Tyrone,
begad! Ould days are hard to bring back into the mouth, but they're
always inside the head.'

Followed a long pause.

'O'Hara was a Divil. Though I saved him, for the honour av the rig'mint,
from his death that time, I say it now. He was a Divil--a long, bould,
black-haired Divil.'

'Which way?' asked Ortheris.

'Women.'

'Thin I know another.'

'Not more than in reason, if you mane me, ye warped walkin '-shtick.
I have been young, an' for why should I not have tuk what I cud? Did
I iver, whin I was Corp'ril, use the rise av my rank--wan step an'
that taken away, more's the sorrow an' the fault av me!--to prosecute
a nefarious inthrigue, as O'Hara did? Did I, whin I was Corp'ril, lay
my spite upon a man an' make his life a dog's life from day to day?
Did I lie, as O'Hara lied, till the young wans in the Tyrone turned
white wid the fear av the Judgment av God killin' thim all in a lump,
as ut killed the woman at Devizes? I did not! I have sinned my sins
an' I have made my confesshin, an' Father Victor knows the worst av
me. O'Hara was tuk, before he cud spake, on Rafferty's doorstep, an'
no man knows the worst av him. But this much I know!

'The Tyrone was recruited any fashion in the ould days. A draf from
Connemara--a draf' from Portsmouth--a draf' from Kerry, an' that was
a blazin' bad draf'--here, there and iverywhere--but the large av thim
was Oirish--Black Oirish. Now there are Oirish an' Oirish. The good
are good as the best, but the bad are wurrst than the wurrst. 'Tis
this way. They clog together in pieces as fast as thieves, an' no wan
knows fwhat they will do till wan turns informer an' the gang is bruk.
But ut begins again, a day later, meetin' in holes an' corners an'
swearin' bloody oaths an' shtickin' a man in the back an' runnin' away,
an' thin waitin' for the blood-money on the reward papers--to see if
ut's worth enough. Those are the Black Oirish, an' 'tis they that bring
dishgrace upon the name av Oireland, an' thim I wud kill--as I nearly
killed wan wanst.

'But to reshume. My room--'twas before I was married--was wid twelve
av the scum av the earth--the pickin's av the gutter--mane men that
wud neither laugh nor talk nor yet get dhrunk as a man shud. They
thried some av their dog's thricks on me, but I dhrew a line round my
cot, an' the man that thransgressed ut wint into hospital for three
days good.

'O'Hara had put his spite on the room--he was my Colour Sargint--an'
nothin' cud we do to plaze him. I was younger than I am now, an' I tuk
what I got in the way av dressing down and punishment-dhrill wid my
tongue in my cheek. But it was diff'rint wid the others, an' why I
cannot say, excipt that some men are borrun mane an' go to dhirty
murdher where a fist is more than enough. Afther a whoile, they changed
their chune to me an' was desp'rit frien'ly--all twelve av thim cursin'
O'Hara in chorus.

'"Eyah," sez I, "O'Hara's a divil an' I'm not for denyin' ut, but is
he the only man in the wurruld? Let him go. He'll get tired av findin'
our kit foul an' our 'coutrements onproperly kep'."

'"We will _not_ let him go," sez they.

'"Thin take him," sez I, "an' a dashed poor yield you will get for
your throuble."

'"Is he not misconductin' himself wid Slimmy's wife?" sez another.

'"She's common to the rig'mint," sez I. "Fwhat has made ye this
partic'lar on a suddint?"

'"Has he not put his spite on the roomful av us? Can we do anythin'
that he will not check us for?" sez another.

'"That's thrue," sez I.

'"Will ye not help us to do aught," sez another--"a big bould man like
you."

'"I will break his head upon his shoulthers av he puts hand on me,"
sez I. "I will give him the lie av he says that I'm dhirty, an' I wud
not mind duckin' him in the Artillery troughs if ut was not that I'm
thryin' for my shtripes."

'"Is that all ye will do?" sez another. "Have ye no more spunk than
that, ye blood-dhrawn calf?"

'"Blood-dhrawn I may be," sez I, gettin' back to my cot an' makin' my
line round ut; "but ye know that the man who comes acrost this mark
will be more blood-dhrawn than me. No man gives me the name in my
mouth," I sez. "Ondersthand, I will have no part wid you in anythin'
ye do, nor will I raise my fist to my shuperior. Is any wan comin'
on?" sez I.

'They made no move, tho' I gave them full time, but stud growlin' an'
snarlin' together at wan ind av the room. I tuk up my cap and wint out
to Canteen, thinkin' no little av mesilf, and there I grew most
ondacintly dhrunk in my legs. My head was all reasonable.

'"Houligan," I sez to a man in E Comp'ny that was by way av bein' a
frind av mine; "I'm overtuk from the belt down. Do you give me the
touch av your shoulther to presarve my formation an' march me acrost
the ground into the high grass. I'll sleep ut off there," sez I; an'
Houligan--he's dead now, but good he was while he lasted--walked wid
me, givin' me the touch whin I wint wide, ontil we came to the high
grass, an', my faith, the sky an' the earth was fair rowlin' undher
me. I made for where the grass was thickust, an' there I slep' off my
liquor wid an easy conscience. I did not desire to come on books too
frequent; my characther havin' been shpotless for the good half av a
year.

'Whin I roused, the dhrink was dyin' out in me, an' I felt as though
a she-cat had littered in my mouth. I had not learned to hould my
liquor wid comfort in thim days. 'Tis little betther I am now. "I will
get Houligan to pour a bucket over my head," thinks I, an' I wud ha'
risen, but I heard some wan say: "Mulvaney can take the blame av ut
for the backslidin' hound he is."

'"Oho!" sez I, an' my head rang like a guard-room gong: "fwhat is the
blame that this young man must take to oblige Tim Vulmea?" For 'twas
Tim Vulmea that shpoke.

'I turned on my belly an' crawled through the grass, a bit at a time,
to where the spache came from. There was the twelve av my room sittin'
down in a little patch, the dhry grass wavin' above their heads an'
the sin av black murdher in their hearts. I put the stuff aside to get
a clear view.

'"Fwhat's that?" sez wan man, jumpin' up.

'"A dog," says Vulmea. "You're a nice hand to this job! As I said,
Mulvaney will take the blame--av ut comes to a pinch."

'"'Tis harrd to swear a man's life away," sez a young wan.

'"Thank ye for that," thinks I. "Now, fwhat the divil are you paragins
conthrivin' against me?"

'"'Tis as easy as dhrinkin' your quart," sez Vulmea. "At seven or
thereon, O'Hara will come acrost to the Married Quarters, goin' to
call on Slimmy's wife, the swine! Wan av us'll pass the wurrd to the
room an' we shtart the divil an' all av a shine--laughin' an' crackin'
on an' t'rowin' our boots about. Thin O'Hara will come to give us the
ordher to be quiet, the more by token bekaze the room-lamp will be
knocked over in the larkin'. He will take the straight road to the ind
door where there's the lamp in the veranda, an' that'll bring him clear
against the light as he shtands. He will not be able to look into the
dhark. Wan av us will loose off, an' a close shot ut will be, an' shame
to the man that misses. 'Twill be Mulvaney's rifle, she that is at the
head av the rack--there's no mistakin' that long-shtocked, cross-eyed
bitch even in the dhark."

'The thief misnamed my ould firin'-piece out av jealousy--I was
pershuaded av that--an' ut made me more angry than all.

'But Vulmea goes on: "O'Hara will dhrop, an' by the time the light's
lit again, there'll be some six av us on the chest av Mulvaney, cryin'
murdher an' rape. Mulvaney's cot is near the ind door, an' the shmokin'
rifle will be lyin' undher him whin we've knocked him over. We know,
an' all the rig'mint knows, that Mulvaney has given O'Hara more lip
than any man av us. Will there be any doubt at the Coort-Martial? Wud
twelve honust sodger-bhoys swear away the life av a dear, quiet,
swate-timpered man such as is Mulvaney--wid his line av pipe-clay roun'
his cot, threatenin' us wid murdher av we overshtepped ut, as we can
truthful testify?"

'"Mary, Mother av Mercy!" thinks I to mesilf; "it is this to have an
unruly mimber an' fistes fit to use! Oh the sneakin' hounds!"

'The big dhrops ran down my face, for I was wake wid the liquor an'
had not the full av my wits about me. I laid shtill an' heard thim
workin' themselves up to swear my life by tellin' tales av ivry time
I had put my mark on wan or another; an' my faith, they was few that
was not so dishtinguished. 'Twas all in the way av fair fight, though,
for niver did I raise my hand excipt whin they had provoked me to ut.

'"'Tis all well," sez wan av thim, "but who's to do this shootin'?"

'"Fwhat matther?" sez Vulmea. "'Tis Mulvaney will do that--at the
Coort-Martial."

'"He will so," sez the man, "but whose hand is put to the trigger--_in
the room?_"

'"Who'll do ut?" sez Vulmea, lookin' round, but divil a man answeared.
They began to dishpute till Kiss, that was always playin' Shpoil Five,
sez: "Thry the kyards!" Wid that he opined his tunic an' tuk out the
greasy palammers, an' they all fell in wid the notion.

'"Deal on!" sez Vulmea, wid a big rattlin' oath, "an' the Black Curse
av Shielygh come to the man that will not do his duty as the kyards
say. Amin!"

'"Black Jack is the masther," sez Kiss, dealin'. Black Jack, Sorr, I
shud expaytiate to you, is the Ace av Shpades which from time immimorial
has been intimately connect wid battle, murdher an' suddin death.

'_Wanst_ Kiss dealt an' there was no sign, but the men was whoite wid
the workin's av their sowls. _Twice_ Kiss dealt an' there was a gray
shine on their cheeks like the mess av an egg. _Three_ times Kiss dealt
an' they was blue. "Have ye not lost him?" sez Vulmea, wipin' the sweat
on him; "Let's ha' done quick!" "Quick ut is," sez Kiss, t'rowin' him
the kyard; an' ut fell face up on his knee--Black Jack!

'Thin they all cackled wid laughin'. "Duty thrippence," sez wan av
thim, "an' damned cheap at that price!" But I cud see they all dhrew
a little away from Vulmea an' lef' him sittin' playin' wid the kyard.
Vulmea sez no word for a whoile but licked his lips--cat-ways. Thin
he threw up his head an' made the men swear by ivry oath known to stand
by him not alone in the room but at the Coort-Martial that was to set
on _me!_ He tould off five av the biggest to stretch me on my cot whin
the shot was fired, an' another man he tould off to put out the light,
an' yet another to load my rifle. He wud not do that himself; an' that
was quare, for 'twas but a little thing considerin'.

'Thin they swore over again that they wud not bethray wan another, an'
crep' out av the grass in diff'rint ways, two by two. A mercy ut was
that they did not come on me. I was sick wid fear in the pit av my
stummick--sick, sick, sick! Afther they was all gone, I wint back to
Canteen an' called for a quart to put a thought in me. Vulmea was
there, dhrinkin' heavy, an' politeful to me beyond reason. "Fwhat will
I do--fwhat will I do?" thinks I to mesilf whin Vulmea wint away.

'Presintly the Arm'rer Sargint comes in stiffin' an' crackin' on, not
pleased wid any wan, bekaze the Martini Henri bein' new to the rig'mint
in those days we used to play the mischief wid her arrangements. 'Twas
a long time before I cud get out av the way av thryin' to pull back
the back-sight an' turnin' her over afther firin'--as if she was a
Snider.

'"Fwhat tailor-men do they give me to work wid?" sez the Arm'rer
Sargint. "Here's Hogan, his nose flat as a table, laid by for a week,
an' ivry Comp'ny sendin' their arrums in knocked to small shivreens."

'"Fwhat's wrong wid Hogan, Sargint?" sez I.

'"Wrong!" sez the Arm'rer Sargint; "I showed him, as though I had been
his mother, the way av shtrippin' a 'Tini, an' he shtrup her clane an'
easy. I tould him to put her to again an' fire a blank into the blow-pit
to show how the dirt hung on the groovin'. He did that, but he did not
put in the pin av the fallin'-block, an' av coorse whin he fired he
was strook by the block jumpin' clear. Well for him 'twas but a blank--a
full charge wud ha' cut his oi out."

'I looked a thrifle wiser than a boiled sheep's head. "How's that,
Sargint?" sez I.

'"This way, ye blundherin' man, an' don't you be doin' ut," sez he.
Wid that he shows me a Waster action--the breech av her all cut away
to show the inside--an' so plazed he was to grumble that he dimonstrated
fwhat Hogan had done twice over. "An' that comes av not knowin' the
wepping you're purvided wid," sez he.

'"Thank ye, Sargint," sez I; "I will come to you again for further
information."

'"Ye will not," sez he. "Kape your clanin'-rod away from the breech-pin
or you will get into throuble."

'I wint outside an' I could ha' danced wid delight for the grandeur
av ut. "They will load my rifle, good luck to thim, whoile I'm away,"
thinks I, and back I wint to the Canteen to give them their clear
chanst.

'The Canteen was fillin' wid men at the ind av the day. I made feign
to be far gone in dhrink, an', wan by wan, all my roomful came in wid
Vulmea. I wint away, walkin' thick an' heavy, but not so thick an'
heavy that any wan cud ha' tuk me. Sure and thrue, there was a
kyartridge gone from my pouch an' lyin' snug in my rifle. I was hot
wid rage against thim all, an' I worried the bullet out wid my teeth
as fast as I cud, the room bein' empty. Then I tuk my boot an' the
clanin'-rod and knocked out the pin av the fallin'-block. Oh, 'twas
music when that pin rowled on the flure! I put ut into my pouch an'
stuck a dab av dirt on the holes in the plate, puttin' the fallin'-block
back. "That'll do your business, Vulmea," sez I, lyin' easy on the
cot. "Come an' sit on my chest the whole room av you, an' I will take
you to my bosom for the biggest divils that iver cheated halter." I
wud have no mercy on Vulmea. His oi or his life--little I cared!

'At dusk they came back, the twelve av thim, an' they had all been
dhrinkin'. I was shammin' sleep on the cot. Wan man wint outside in
the veranda. Whin he whishtled they began to rage roun' the room an'
carry on tremenjus. But I niver want to hear men laugh as they
did--skylarkin' too! 'Twas like mad jackals.

'"Shtop that blasted noise!" sez O'Hara in the dark, an' pop goes the
room-lamp. I cud hear O'Hara runnin' up an' the rattlin' av my rifle
in the rack an' the men breathin' heavy as they stud roun' my cot. I
cud see O'Hara in the light av the veranda lamp, an' thin I heard the
crack av my rifle. She cried loud, poor darlint, bein' mishandled.
Next minut' five men were houldin' me down. "Go easy," I sez; "fwhat's
ut all about?"

'Thin Vulmea, on the flure, raised a howl you cud hear from wan ind
av cantonmints to the other. "I'm dead, I'm butchered, I'm blind!" sez
he. "Saints have mercy on my sinful sowl! Sind for Father Constant!
Oh sind for Father Constant an' let me go clean!" By that I knew he
was not so dead as I cud ha' wished.

'O'Hara picks up the lamp in the veranda wid a hand as stiddy as a
rest. "Fwhat damned dog's thrick is this av yours?" sez he, an turns
the light on Tim Vulmea that was shwimmin' in blood from top to toe.
The fallin'-block had sprung free behin' a full charge av powther--
good care I tuk to bite down the brass af ther takin' out the bullet
that there might be somethin' to give ut full worth--an' had cut Tim
from the lip to the corner av the right eye, lavin' the eyelid in
tatthers, an' so up an' along by the forehead to the hair. 'Twas more
av a rakin' plough, if you will ondherstand, than a clean cut; an'
niver did I see a man bleed as Vulmea did. The dhrink an' the stew
that he was in pumped the blood strong. The minut' the men sittin' on
my chest heard O'Hara spakin' they scatthered each wan to his cot, an'
cried out very politeful: "Fwhat is ut, Sargint?"

'"Fwhat is ut!" sez O'Hara, shakin' Tim. "Well an' good do you know
fwhat ut is, ye skulkin' ditch-lurkin' dogs! Get a _doolie,_ an' take
this whimperin' scutt away. There will be more heard av ut than any
av you will care for."

'Vulmea sat up rockin' his head in his hand an' moanin' for Father
Constant.

'"Be done!" sez O'Hara, dhraggin' him up by the hair. "You're none so
dead that you cannot go fifteen years for thryin' to shoot me."

'"I did not," sez Vulmea; "I was shootin' mesilf."

'"That's quare," sez O'Hara, "for the front av my jackut is black wid
your powther." He tuk up the rifle that was still warm an' began to
laugh. "I'll make your life Hell to you," sez he, "for attempted murdher
an' kapin' your rifle onproperly. You'll be hanged first an' thin put
undher stoppages for four fifteen. The rifle's done for," sez he.

'"Why, 'tis my rifle!" sez I, comin' up to look; "Vulmea, ye divil,
fwhat were you doin' wid her--answer me that?"

'"Lave me alone," sez Vulmea; "I'm dyin'!"

'"I'll wait till you're betther," sez I, "an' thin we two will talk
ut out umbrageous."

'O'Hara pitched Tim into the _doolie_, none too tinder, but all the
bhoys kep' by their cots, which was not the sign av innocint men. I
was huntin' ivrywhere for my fallin'-block, but not findin' ut at all.
I niver found ut.

'"_Now_ fwhat will I do?" sez O'Hara, swinging the veranda light in
his hand an' lookin' down the room. I had hate and contimpt av O'Hara
an' I have now, dead tho' he is, but, for all that, will I say he was
a brave man. He is baskin' in Purgathory this tide, but I wish he cud
hear that, whin he stud lookin' down the room an' the bhoys shivered
before the oi av him, I knew him for a brave man an' I liked him _so_.

'"Fwhat will I do?" sez O'Hara agin, an' we heard the voice av a woman
low an' sof' in the veranda. 'Twas Slimmy's wife, come over at the
shot, sittin' on wan av the benches an' scarce able to walk.

'"O Denny!--Denny, dear," sez she, "have they kilt you?"

'O'Hara looked down the room again an' showed his teeth to the gum.
Then he spat on the flure.

'"You're not worth ut," sez he. "Light that lamp, ye dogs," an' wid
that he turned away, an' I saw him walkin' off wid Slimmy's wife; she
thryin' to wipe off the powther-black on the front av his jackut wid
her handkerchief. "A brave man you are," thinks I--"a brave man an'
a bad woman."

'No wan said a word for a time. They was all ashamed, past spache.

'"Fwhat d'you think he will do?" sez wan av thim at last. "He knows
we're all in ut."

'"Are we so?" sez I from my cot. "The man that sez that to me will be
hurt. I do not know," sez I, "fwhat onderhand divilmint you have
conthrived, but by what I've seen I know that you cannot commit murdher
wid another man's rifle--such shakin' cowards you are. I'm goin' to
slape," I sez, "an' you can blow my head off whoile I lay." I did not
slape, though, for a long time. Can ye wonder?

'Next morn the news was through all the rig'mint, an' there was nothin'
that the men did not tell. O'Hara reports, fair an' easy, that Vulmea
was come to grief through tamperin' wid his rifle in barricks, all for
to show the mechanism. An' by my sowl, he had the impart'nince to say
that he was on the shpot at the time an' cud certify that ut was an
accidint! You might ha' knocked my roomful down wid a straw whin they
heard that. 'Twas lucky for thim that the bhoys were always thryin'
to find out how the new rifle was made, an' a lot av thim had come up
for easin' the pull by shtickin' bits av grass an' such in the part
av the lock that showed near the thrigger. The first issues of the
'Tinis was not covered in, an' I mesilf have eased the pull av mine
time an' agin. A light pull is ten points on the range to me.

'"I will not have this foolishness!" sez the Colonel. "I will twist
the tail off Vulmea!" sez he; but whin he saw him, all tied up an'
groanin' in hospital, he changed his will. "Make him an early
convalescint," sez he to the Doctor, an' Vulmea was made so for a
warnin'. His big bloody bandages an' face puckered up to wan side did
more to kape the bhoys from messin' wid the insides av their rifles
than any punishmint.

'O'Hara gave no reason for fwhat he'd said, an' all my roomful were
too glad to inquire, tho' he put his spite upon thim more wearin' than
before. Wan day, howiver, he tuk me apart very polite, for he cud be
that at the choosin'.

'"You're a good sodger, tho' you're a damned insolint man," sez he.

'"Fair words, Sargint," sez I, "or I may be insolint again."

'"'Tis not like you," sez he, "to lave your rifle in the rack widout
the breech-pin, for widout the breech-pin she was whin Vulmea fired.
I should ha' found the break av ut in the eyes av the holes, else,"
he sez.

'"Sargint," sez I, "fwhat wud your life ha' been worth av the breech-pin
had been in place, for, on my sowl, my life wud be worth just as much
to me av I tould you whether ut was or was not. Be thankful the bullet
was not there," I sez.

'"That's thrue," sez he, pulling his moustache; "but I do not believe
that you, for all your lip, was in that business."

'"Sargint," I sez, "I cud hammer the life out av a man in ten minuts
wid my fistes if that man dishpleased me; for I am a good sodger, an'
I will be threated as such, an' whoile my fistes are my own they're
strong enough for all work I have to do. They do not fly back towards
me!" sez I, lookin' him betune the eyes.

'"You're a good man," sez he, lookin' me betune the eyes--an' oh he
was a gran'-built man to see!--"you're a good man," he sez, "an' I cud
wish, for the pure frolic av ut, that I was not a Sargint, or that you
were not a Privit; an' you will think me no coward whin I say this
thing."

'"I do not," sez I. "I saw you whin Vulmea mishandled the rifle. But,
Sargint," I sez, "take the wurrd from me now, spakin' as man to man
wid the shtripes off, tho' 'tis little right I have to talk, me being
fwhat I am by natur'. This time ye tuk no harm, an' next time ye may
not, but, in the ind, so sure as Slimmy's wife came into the veranda,
so sure will ye take harm--an' bad harm. Have thought, Sargint," sez
I. "Is ut worth ut?"

'"Ye're a bould man," sez he, breathin' harrd. "A very bould man. But
I am a bould man tu. Do you go your way, Privit Mulvaney, an' I will
go mine."

'We had no further spache thin or afther, but, wan by another, he
drafted the twelve av my room out into other rooms an' got thim spread
among the Comp'nies, for they was not a good breed to live together,
an' the Comp 'ny orf'cers saw ut. They wud ha' shot me in the night
av they had known fwhat I knew; but that they did not.

'An', in the ind, as I said, O'Hara met his death from Rafferty for
foolin' wid his wife. He wint his own way too well--Eyah, too well!
Shtraight to that affair, widout turnin' to the right or to the lef',
he wint, an' may the Lord have mercy on his sowl. Amin!'

''Ear! 'Ear!' said Ortheris, pointing the moral with a wave of his
pipe. 'An' this is 'im 'oo would be a bloomin' Vulmea all for the sake
of Mullins an' a bloomin' button! Mullins never went after a woman in
his life. Mrs. Mullins, she saw 'im one day--'

'Ortheris,' I said, hastily, for the romances of Private Ortheris are
all too daring for publication, 'look at the sun. It's a quarter past
six!'

'O Lord! Three quarters of an hour for five an' a 'arf miles! We'll
'ave to run like Jimmy O.'

The Three Musketeers clambered on to the bridge, and departed hastily
in the direction of the cantonment road. When I overtook them I offered
them two stirrups and a tail, which they accepted enthusiastically.
Ortheris held the tail, and in this manner we trotted steadily through
the shadows by an unfrequented road.

At the turn into the cantonments we heard carriage wheels. It was the
Colonel's barouche, and in it sat the Colonel's wife and daughter. I
caught a suppressed chuckle, and my beast sprang forward with a lighter
step.

The Three Musketeers had vanished into the night.




L'ENVOI

  And they were stronger hands than mine
  That digged the Ruby from the earth--
  More cunning brains that made it worth
  The large desire of a King;
  And bolder hearts that through the brine
  Went down the Perfect Pearl to bring.

  Lo, I have made in common clay
  Rude figures of a rough-hewn race;
  For Pearls strew not the market-place
  In this my town of banishment,
  Where with the shifting dust I play
  And eat the bread of Discontent.

  Yet is there life in that I make,--
  Oh Thou who knowest, turn and see,
  As Thou hast power over me,
  So I have power over these,
  Because I wrought them for Thy sake,
  And breathed in them mine agonies.

  Small mirth was in the making. Now
  I lift the cloth that clokes the clay,
  And, wearied, at Thy feet I lay
  My wares ere I go forth to sell.
  The long _bazar_ will praise--but Thou--
  Heart of my heart, have I done well?




POOR DEAR MAMMA

  The wild hawk to the wind-swept sky,
  The deer to the wholesome wold,
  And the heart of a man to the heart of a maid,
  As it was in the days of old.
        _Gypsy Song._

SCENE.--_Interior of_ MISS MINNIE THREEGAN'S _bedroom at Simla._ MISS
THREEGAN, _in window-seat, turning over a drawerful of things._ MISS
EMMA DEERCOURT, _bosom-friend, who has come to spend the day, sitting
on the bed, manipulating the bodice of a ballroom frock and a bunch
of artificial lilies of the valley_. _Time,_ 5.30 P. M. _on a hot May
afternoon._

MISS DEERCOURT. And _he_ said: 'I shall _never_ forget this dance,'
and, of course, I said: 'Oh! how _can_ you be so silly!' Do you think
he meant anything, dear?

MISS THREEGAN. (_Extracting long lavender silk stocking from the
rubbish._) You know him better than _I_ do.

MISS D. Oh, _do_ be sympathetic, Minnie! I'm _sure_ he does. At least
I _would_ be sure if he wasn't always riding with that odious Mrs.
Hagan.

MISS T. I suppose so. How _does_ one manage to dance through one's
heels first? Look at this--isn't it shameful? (_Spreads stocking-heel
on open hand for inspection_)

MISS D. Never mind that! You can't mend it. Help me with this hateful
bodice, I've run the string _so_, and I've run the string _so_, and
I can't make the fulness come right. Where would you put this? (_Waves
lilies of the valley._)

MISS T. As high up on the shoulder as possible.

MISS D. Am I quite tall enough? I know it makes May Olger look
lop-sided.

MISS T. Yes, but May hasn't your shoulders. Hers are like a hock-bottle.

BEARER. (_Rapping at door._) Captain Sahib _aya._

MISS D. (_Jumping up wildly, and hunting for body, which she has
discarded owing to the heat of the day._) Captain Sahib! What Captain
Sahib? Oh, good gracious, and I'm only half dressed! Well, I shan't
bother.

MISS T. (_Calmly._) You needn't. It isn't for us. That's Captain Gadsby.
He is going for a ride with Mamma. He generally comes five days out of
the seven.

AGONISED VOICE. (_From an inner apartment._) Minnie, run out and give
Captain Gadsby some tea, and tell him I shall be ready in ten minutes;
and, O Minnie, come to me an instant, there's a dear girl!

MISS T. Oh, bother! (_Aloud._) Very well, Mamma.

_Exit, and reappears, after five minutes, flushed, and rubbing her
fingers._

MISS D. You look pink. What has happened?

MISS T. (_In a stage whisper._) A twenty-four-inch waist, and she won't
let it out. Where _are_ my bangles? (_Rummages on the toilet-table,
and dabs at her hair with a brush in the interval._)

MISS D. Who is this Captain Gadsby? I don't think I've met him.

MISS T. You _must_ have. He belongs to the Harrar set. I've danced
with him, but I've never talked to him. He's a big yellow man, just
like a newly-hatched chicken, with an e-normous moustache. He walks
like this (_imitates Cavalry swagger_), and he goes 'Ha-Hmmm!' deep
down in his throat when he can't think of anything to say. Mamma likes
him. I don't.

MISS D. (_Abstractedly_.) Does he wax his moustache?

MISS T. (_Busy with powder-puff_.} Yes, I think so. Why?

MISS D. (_Bending oner the bodice and sewing furiously_.) Oh,
nothing--only--

MISS T. (_Sternly_.) Only what? Out with it, Emma.

MISS D. Well, May Olger--she's engaged to Mr. Charteris, you
know--said--Promise you won't repeat this?

MISS T. Yes, I promise. What did she say?

MISS D. That--that being kissed (_with a rush_) by a man who _didn't_
wax his moustache was--like eating an egg without salt.

MISS T. (_At her full height, with crushing scorn_.) May Olger is a
horrid, nasty _Thing_, and you can tell her I said so. I'm glad she
doesn't belong to my set--I must go and feed this _man!_ Do I look
presentable?

MISS D. Yes, perfectly. Be quick and hand him over to your Mother, and
then we can talk. _I_ shall listen at the door to hear what you say
to him.

MISS T. 'Sure I don't care. _I'm_ not afraid of Captain Gadsby.

_In proof of this swings into drawing-room with a mannish stride
followed by two short steps, which produces the effect of a restive
horse entering. Misses CAPTAIN GADSBY, who is sitting in the shadow
of the window-curtain, and gazes round helplessly._

CAPTAIN GADSBY. (_Aside_.) The filly, by Jove! 'Must ha' picked up
that action from the sire. (_Aloud, rising_.) Good evening, Miss
Threegan.

MISS T. (_Conscious that she is flushing_.) Good evening, Captain
Gadsby. Mamma told me to say that she will be ready in a few minutes.
Won't you have some tea? (_Aside_.) I hope Mamma will be quick. What
_am_ I to say to the creature? (_Aloud and abruptly_.) Milk and sugar?

CAPT. G. No sugar, tha-anks, and very little milk. Ha-Hmmm.

MISS T. (_Aside_.) If he's going to do that, I'm lost. I shall laugh.
I _know_ I shall!

CAPT. G. (_Pulling at his moustache and watching it sideways down his
nose_.) Ha-Hmmm. (_Aside_.) 'Wonder what the little beast can talk
about. 'Must make a shot at it.

MISS T. (_Aside_.) Oh, this is agonising. I _must_ say something.

BOTH TOGETHER. Have you been---

CAPT. G. I beg your pardon. You were going to say---

MISS T. (_Who has been watching the moustache with awed fascination_.)
Won't you have some eggs?

CAPT. G. (_Looking bewilderedly at the tea-table_.) Eggs! (_A side_.)
O Hades! She must have a nursery-tea at this hour. S'pose they've wiped
her mouth and sent her to me while the Mother is getting on her duds.
(_Aloud_.) No, thanks.

MISS T. (_Crimson with confusion_.) Oh! I didn't mean that. I wasn't
thinking of mou--eggs for an instant. I mean _salt_. Won't you have
some sa--- sweets? (_Aside_.) He'll think me a raving lunatic. I wish
Mamma would come.

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) It _was_ a nursery-tea and she's ashamed of it.
By Jove! She doesn't look half bad when she colours up like that.
(_Aloud, helping himself from the dish_.) Have you seen those new
chocolates at Peliti's?

MISS T. No, I made these myself. What are they like?

CAPT. G. These! _De_-licious. (_Aside_.) And that's a fact.

MISS T. (_Aside_.) Oh, bother! he'll think I'm fishing for compliments.
(_Aloud_.) No, Peliti's of course.

CAPT. G. (_Enthusiastically_.) Not to compare with these. How d'you
make them? I can't get my _khansamah_ to understand the simplest thing
beyond mutton and fowl.

MISS T. Yes? I'm not a _khansamah_, you know. Perhaps you frighten
him. You should never frighten a servant. He loses his head. It's very
bad policy.

CAPT. G. He's so awf'ly stupid.

MISS T. (_Folding her hands in her lap_.) You should call him quietly
and say: 'O _khansamah jee!_'

CAPT. G. (_Getting interested_.) Yes? (_Aside_.) Fancy that little
featherweight saying, 'O _khansamah jee_' to my bloodthirsty Mir Khan!

MISS T. Then you should explain the dinner, dish by dish.

CAPT. G. But I can't speak the vernacular.

MISS T. (_Patronizingly_.) You should pass the Higher Standard and try.

CAPT. G. I have, but I don't seem to be any the wiser. Are you?

MISS T. I never passed the Higher Standard. But the _khansamah_ is
very patient with me. He doesn't get angry when I talk about sheep's
_topees_, or order _maunds_ of grain when I mean _seers_.

CAPT. G. (_Aside, with intense indignation_.) I'd like to see Mir Khan
being rude to that girl! Hullo! Steady the Buffs! (_Aloud_.) And do
you understand about horses, too?

MISS T. A little--not very much. I can't doctor them, but I know what
they ought to eat, and I am in charge of our stable.

CAPT. G. Indeed! You might help me then. What ought a man to give his
_sais_ in the Hills? My ruffian says eight rupees, because everything
is so dear.

MISS T. Six rupees a month, and one rupee Simla allowance--neither
more nor less. And a grass-cut gets six rupees. That's better than
buying grass in the bazar.

CAPT. G. (_Admiringly_.) How do you know?

MISS T. I have tried both ways.

CAPT. G. Do you ride much, then? I've never seen you on the Mall.

MISS T. (_Aside_.) I haven't passed him _more_ than fifty times.
(_Aloud_.) Nearly every day.

CAPT. G. By Jove! I didn't know that. Ha-Hmmm!
(_Pulls at his moustache and is silent for forty seconds_.)

MISS T. (_Desperately, and wondering what will happen next._) It looks
beautiful. I shouldn't touch it if I were you. (_Aside_.) It's all
Mamma's fault for not coming before. I _will_ be rude!

CAPT. G. (_Bronzing under the tan and bringing down his hand very
quickly_.) Eh! Wha-at! Oh, yes! Ha! Ha! (_Laughs uneasily_.) (_Aside_.)
Well, of _all_ the dashed cheek! I never had a woman say that to me
yet. She must be a cool hand or else--Ah! that nursery-tea!

VOICE FROM THE UNKNOWN. Tchk! Tchk! Tchk!

CAPT. G. Good Gracious! What's that?

MISS T. The dog, I think. (_Aside_.) Emma _has_ been listening, and
I'll never forgive her!

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) They don't keep dogs here. (_Aloud_.) Didn't
sound like a dog, did it?

MISS T. Then it must have been the cat. Let's go into the veranda.
What a lovely evening it is!

_Steps into veranda and looks out across the hills into sunset. The
Captain follows._

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) Superb eyes! I wonder that I never noticed them
before! (_Aloud_.) There's going to be a dance at Viceregal Lodge on
Wednesday. Can you spare me one?

MISS T. (_Shortly_.) No! I don't want any of your charity-dances. You
only ask me because Mamma told you to. I hop and I bump. You _know_
I do!

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) That's true, but little girls shouldn't understand
these things. (_Aloud_.) _No_, on my word, I don't. You dance
beautifully.

MISS T. Then why do you always stand out after half a dozen turns? I
thought officers in the Army didn't tell fibs.

CAPT. G. It wasn't a fib, believe me. I really _do_ want the pleasure
of a dance with you.

MISS T. (_Wickedly_.) Why? Won't Mamma dance with you any more?

CAPT. G. (_More earnestly than the necessity demands_.) I wasn't
thinking of your Mother. (_Aside_.) You little vixen!

MISS T. (_Still looking out of the window_.) Eh? Oh, I beg your pardon.
I was thinking of something else.

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) Well! I wonder what she'll say next. I've never
known a woman treat _me_ like this before. I might be--Dash it, I might
be an Infantry subaltern! (_Aloud_.) Oh, _please_ don't trouble. I'm
not worth thinking about. Isn't your Mother ready yet?

MISS T. I should think so; but promise me, Captain Gadsby, you won't
take poor dear Mamma twice round Jakko any more. It tires her so.

CAPT. G. She says that no exercise tires her.

MISS T. Yes, but she suffers afterwards. _You_ don't know what
rheumatism is, and you oughtn't to keep her out so late, when it gets
chill in the evenings.

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) Rheumatism! I _thought_ she came off her horse
rather in a bunch. Whew! One lives and learns. (_Aloud_.) I'm sorry
to hear that. She hasn't mentioned it to me.

MISS T. (_Flurried_.) Of course not! Poor dear Mamma never would. And
you mustn't say that I told you either. Promise me that you won't. Oh,
Captain Gadsby, _promise_ me you won't!

CAPT. G. I am dumb, or--I shall be as soon as you've given me that
dance, and another--if you can trouble yourself to think about me for
a minute.

MISS T. But you won't like it one little bit. You'll be awfully sorry
afterwards.

CAPT. G. I shall like it above all things, and I shall only be sorry
that I didn't get more. (_Aside_.) Now what in the world am I saying?

MISS T. Very well. You will have only yourself to thank if your toes
are trodden on. Shall we say Seven?

CAPT. G. And Eleven. (_Aside_.) She can't be more than eight stone,
but, even then, it's an absurdly small foot. (_Looks at his own riding
boots_.)

MISS T. They're beautifully shiny. I can almost see my face in them.

CAPT. G. I was thinking whether I should have to go on crutches for
the rest of my life if you trod on my toes.

MISS T. Very likely. Why not change Eleven for a square?

CAPT. G. No, _please!_ I want them both waltzes. Won't you write them
down?

MISS T. _I_ don't get so many dances that I shall confuse them. _You_
will be the offender.

CAPT. G. Wait and see! (_Aside_.) She doesn't dance perfectly, perhaps,
but--

MISS T. Your tea must have got cold by this time. Won't you have another
cup?

CAPT. G. No, thanks. Don't you think it's pleasanter out in the veranda?
(_Aside_.) I never saw hair take that colour in the sunshine before.
(_Aloud_.) It's like one of Dicksee's pictures.

MISS T. Yes! It's a wonderful sunset, isn't it? (_Bluntly_.) But what
do _you_ know about Dicksee's pictures?

CAPT. G. I go Home occasionally. And I used to know the Galleries.
(_Nervously_.) You mustn't think me only a Philistine with--a moustache.

MISS T. Don't! _Please_ don't! I'm _so_ sorry for what I said then.
I was _horribly_ rude. It slipped out before I thought. Don't you know
the temptation to say frightful and shocking things just for the mere
sake of saying them? I'm afraid I gave way to it.

CAPT. G. (_Watching the girl as she flushes_.) I _think_ I know the
feeling. It would be terrible if we all yielded to it, wouldn't it?
For instance, I might say--

POOR DEAR MAMMA. (_Entering, habited, hatted, and booted_.) Ah, Captain
Gadsby! 'Sorry to keep you waiting. 'Hope you haven't been bored. 'My
little girl been talking to you?

MISS T. (_Aside_.) I'm not sorry I spoke about the rheumatism. I'm
not! I'm NOT! I only wish I'd mentioned the corns too.

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) What a shame! I wonder how old she is. It never
occurred to me before. (_Aloud_.) We've been discussing 'Shakespeare
and the musical glasses' in the veranda.

MISS T. (_Aside._) Nice man! He knows that quotation. He _isn't_ a
Philistine with a moustache. (_Aloud._) Good-bye, Captain Gadsby.
(_Aside._) What a huge hand and _what_ a squeeze! I don't suppose he
meant it, but he has driven the rings into my fingers.

POOR DEAR MAMMA. Has Vermillion come round yet? Oh, yes! Captain Gadsby,
don't you think that the saddle is too far forward? (_They pass into
the front veranda._)

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) How the dickens should I know what she prefers?
She told me that she doted on horses. (_Aloud._) I think it is.

MISS T. (_Coming out into front veranda._) Oh! Bad Buldoo! I must speak
to him for this. He has taken up the curb two links, and Vermillion
hates that. (_Passes out and to horse's head._)

CAPT. G. Let me do it.

MISS T. No, Vermillion understands me. Don't you, old man? (_Looses
curb-chain skilfully, and pats horse on nose and throttle._) Poor
Vermillion! _Did_ they want to cut his chin off? There!

CAPTAIN GADSBY _watches the interlude with undisguised admiration._

POOR DEAR MAMMA. (_Tartly to_ MISS T.) You've forgotten your guest,
I think, dear.

MISS T. Good gracious! So I have! Good-bye. (_Retreats indoors
hastily_)

POOR DEAR MAMMA. (_Bunching reins in fingers hampered by too tight
gauntlets_) Captain Gadsby!

CAPTAIN GADSBY _stoops and makes the foot-rest._

POOR DEAR MAMMA _blunders, halts too long, and breaks through it._

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) Can't hold up eleven stone for ever. It's all your
rheumatism. (_Aloud_.) Can't imagine why I was so clumsy. (_Aside_.)
Now Little Featherweight would have gone up like a bird.

_They ride out of the garden. The Captain falls back._

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) How that habit catches her under the arms! Ugh!

POOR DEAR MAMMA. (_With the worn smile of sixteen seasons, the worse
for exchange_.) You're dull this afternoon, Captain Gadsby.

CAPT. G. (_Spurring up wearily_.) Why did you keep me waiting so long?

_Et caetera, et caetera, et caetera._

(AN INTERVAL OF THREE WEEKS.)

GILDED YOUTH. (_Sitting on railings opposite Town   Hall_.) Hullo,
Gaddy! 'Been trotting out the Gorgonzola! We all thought it was the
Gorgon you're mashing.

CAPT. G. (_With withering emphasis_.) You young cub! What the ----
does it matter to you?

_Proceeds to read GILDED YOUTH a lecture on discretion and deportment,
which crumbles latter like a Chinese Lantern. Departs fuming._

(FURTHER INTERVAL OF FIVE WEEKS.)

SCENE.--_Exterior of New Simla Library on a foggy evening_. MISS
THREEGAN _and_ MISS DEERCOURT _meet among the 'rickshaws_. MISS T. _is
carrying a bundle of books under her left arm_.

MISS D. (_Level intonation_.) Well?

MISS T. (_Ascending intonation_.) Well?

MISS D. (_Capturing her friend's left arm, taking away all the books,
placing books in 'rickshaw, returning to arm, securing hand by the
third finger and investigating_.) Well! You _bad_ girl! And you _never_
told me.

MISS T. (_Demurely_.) He--he--he only spoke yesterday afternoon.

MISS D. Bless you, dear! And I'm to be bridesmaid, aren't I? You _know_
you promised _ever_ so long ago.

MISS T. Of course. I'll tell you all about it to-morrow. (_Gets
into'rickshaw_.) O Emma!

MISS D. (_With intense interest_.) Yes, dear?

MISS T. (_Piano_.) It's quite true--about--the--egg.

MISS D. What egg?

MISS T. (_Pianissimo prestissimo_.) The egg without the salt. (_Forte_.)
_Chalo ghar ko jaldi, jhampani!_ (Go home, _jhampani_.)




THE WORLD WITHOUT

Certain people of importance.

SCENE.--_Smoking-room of the Deychi Club. Time_, 10.30 P. M. _of a
stuffy night in the Rains. Four men dispersed in picturesque attitudes
and easy-chairs. To these enter_ BLAYNE _of the Irregular Moguls, in
evening dress_.

BLAYNE. Phew! The Judge ought to be hanged in his own store-godown.
Hi, _khitmatgar! Poora_ whiskey-peg, to take the taste out of my mouth.

CURTISS. (_Royal Artillery_.) That's it, is it? What the deuce made
you dine at the Judge's? You know his _bandobust_.

BLAYNE. 'Thought it couldn't be worse than the Club; but I'll swear
he buys ullaged liquor and doctors it with gin and ink (_looking round
the room_). Is this all of you tonight?

DOONE. (_P. W. D._) Anthony was called out at dinner. Mingle had a
pain in his tummy.

CURTISS. Miggy dies of cholera once a week in the Rains, and gets drunk
on chlorodyne in between. 'Good little chap, though. Any one at the
Judge's, Blayne?

BLAYNE. Cockley and his _memsahib_ looking awfully white and fagged.
'Female girl--couldn't catch the name--on her way to the Hills, under
the Cockleys' charge--the Judge, and Markyn fresh from Simla--
disgustingly fit.

CURTISS. Good Lord, how truly magnificent! Was there enough ice? When
I mangled garbage there I got one whole lump--nearly as big as a walnut.
What had Markyn to say for himself?

BLAYNE. 'Seems that every one is having a fairly good time up there
in spite of the rain. By Jove, that reminds me! I know I hadn't come
across just for the pleasure of your society. News! Great news! Markyn
told me.

DOONE. Who's dead now?

BLAYNE. No one that I know of; but Gaddy's hooked at last!

DROPPING CHORUS. How much? The Devil! Markyn was pulling your leg. Not
GADDY!

BLAYNE. (Humming.) 'Yea, verily, verily, verily! Verily, verily, I
say unto thee.' Theodore, the gift o' God! Our Phillup! It's been
given out up above.

MACKESY. (_Barrister-at-Law_.) Huh! Women will give out anything. What
does accused say?

BLAYNE. Markyn told me that he congratulated him warily--one hand held
out, t'other ready to guard. Gaddy turned pink and said it was so.

CURTISS. Poor old Gaddy! They all do it. Who's _she?_ Let's hear the
details.

BLAYNE. She's a girl--daughter of a Colonel Somebody.

DOONE. Simla's stiff with Colonels' daughters. Be more explicit.

BLAYNE. Wait a shake. What _was_ her name? Three--something. Three--

CURTISS. Stars, perhaps. Gaddy knows _that_ brand.

BLAYNE. Threegan--Minnie Threegan.

MACKESY. Threegan! Isn't she a little bit of a girl with red hair?

BLAYNE. 'Bout that--from what Markyn said.

MACKESY. Then I've met her. She was at Lucknow last season. 'Owned a
permanently juvenile Mamma, and danced damnably. I say, Jervoise, you
knew the Threegans, didn't you?

JERVOISE. (_Civilian of twenty-five years' service, waking up from his
doze_.) Eh? What's that? Knew who? How? I thought I was at Home,
confound you!

MACKESY. The Threegan girl's engaged, so Blayne says.

JERVOISE. (_Slowly_.) Engaged--engaged! Bless my soul! I'm getting an
old man! Little Minnie Threegan engaged. It was only the other day I
went home with them in the _Surat_--no, the _Massilia_--and she was
crawling about on her hands and knees among the _ayahs_. 'Used to call
me the '_Tick Tack Sahib_' because I showed her my watch. And that was
in Sixty-seven--no, Seventy. Good God, how time flies! I'm an old man.
I remember when Threegan married Miss Derwent--daughter of old Hooky
Derwent--but that was before your time. And so the little baby's engaged
to have a little baby of her own! Who's the other fool?

MACKESY. Gadsby of the Pink Hussars.

JERVOISE. 'Never met him. Threegan lived in debt, married in debt,
and'll die in debt. 'Must be glad to get the girl off his hands.

BLAYNE. Gaddy has money--lucky devil. Place at Home, too.

DOONE. He comes of first-class stock. 'Can't quite understand his being
caught by a Colonel's daughter, and (_looking cautiously round room_)
Black Infantry at that! No offence to you, Blayne.

BLAYNE. (_Stiffly_.) Not much, tha-anks.

CURTISS. (_Quoting motto of Irregular Moguls_.) 'We are what we are,'
eh, old man? But Gaddy was such a superior animal as a rule. Why didn't
he go Home and pick his wife there?

MACKESY. They are all alike when they come to the turn into the
straight. About thirty a man begins to get sick of living alone--

CURTISS. And of the eternal muttony-chop in the morning.

DOONE. It's dead goat as a rule, but go on, Mackesy.

MACKESY. If a man's once taken that way nothing will hold him. Do you
remember Benoit of your service, Doone? They transferred him to Tharanda
when his time came, and he married a platelayer's daughter, or something
of that kind. She was the only female about the place.

DOONE. Yes, poor brute. That smashed Benoit's chances of promotion
altogether. Mrs. Benoit used to ask: 'Was you goin' to the dance this
evenin'?'

CURTISS. Hang it all! Gaddy hasn't married beneath him. There's no
tar-brush in the family, I suppose.

JERVOISE. Tar-brush! Not an anna. You young fellows talk as though the
man was doing the girl an honour in marrying her. You're all too
conceited--nothing's good enough for you.

BLAYNE. Not even an empty Club, a dam' bad dinner at the Judge's, and
a Station as sickly as a hospital. You're quite right. We're a set of
Sybarites.

DOONE. Luxurious dogs, wallowing in---

CURTISS. Prickly heat between the shoulders. I'm covered with it. Let's
hope Beora will be cooler.

BLAYNE. Whew! Are _you_ ordered into camp, too?  I thought the Gunners
had a clean sheet.

CURTISS. No, worse luck. Two cases yesterday--one died--and if we have
a third, out we go. Is there any shooting at Beora, Doone?

DOONE. The country's under water, except the patch by the Grand Trunk
Road. I was there yesterday, looking at a bund, and came across four
poor devils in their last stage. It's rather bad from here to Kuchara.

CURTISS. Then we're pretty certain to have a heavy go of it. Heigho!
I shouldn't mind changing places with Gaddy for a while. 'Sport with
Amaryllis in the shade of the Town Hall, and all that. Oh, why doesn't
somebody come and marry me, instead of letting me go into cholera camp?

MACKESY. Ask the Committee.

CURTISS. You ruffian! You'll stand me another peg for that. Blayne,
what will you take? Mackesy is fine on moral grounds. Doone, have you
any preference?

DOONE. Small glass Kummel, please. Excellent carminative, these days.
Anthony told me so.

MACKESY. (_Signing votucher for four drinks._) Most unfair punishment.
I only thought of Curtiss as Actaeon being chivied round the billiard
tables by the nymphs of Diana.

BLAYNE. Curtiss would have to import his nymphs by train. Mrs. Cockley's
the only woman in the Station. She won't leave Cockley, and he's doing
his best to get her to go.

CURTISS. Good, indeed! Here's Mrs. Cockley's health. To the only wife
in the Station and a damned brave woman!

OMNES. (_Drinking._) A damned brave woman!

BLAYNE. I suppose Gaddy will bring his wife here at the end of the
cold weather. They are going to be married almost immediately, I
believe.

CURTISS. Gaddy may thank his luck that the Pink Hussars are all
detachment and no headquarters this hot weather, or he'd be torn from
the arms of his love as sure as death. Have you ever noticed the
thorough-minded way British Cavalry take to cholera? It's because they
are so expensive. If the Pinks had stood fast here, they would have
been out in camp a month ago. Yes, I should decidedly like to be Gaddy.

MACKESY. He'll go Home after he's married, and send in his papers--see
if he doesn't.

BLAYNE. Why shouldn't he? Hasn't he money? Would any one of us be here
if we weren't paupers?

DOONE. Poor old pauper! What has became of the six hundred you rooked
from our table last month?

BLAYNE. It took unto itself wings. I think an enterprising tradesman
got some of it, and a _shroff_ gobbled the rest--or else I spent it.

CURTISS. Gaddy never had dealings with a _shroff_ in his life.

DOONE. Virtuous Gaddy! If _I_ had three thousand a month, paid from
England, I don't think I'd deal with a _shroff_ either.

MACKESY. (Yawning.) Oh, it's a sweet life! I wonder whether matrimony
would make it sweeter.

CURTISS. Ask Cockley--with his wife dying by inches!

BLAYNE. Go home and get a fool of a girl to come out to--what is it
Thackeray says?--'the splendid palace of an Indian pro-consul.'

DOONE. Which reminds me. My quarters leak like a sieve. I had fever
last night from sleeping in a swamp. And the worst of it is, one can't
do anything to a roof till the Rains are over.

CURTISS. What's wrong with you? _You_ haven't eighty rotting Tommies
to take into a running stream.

DOONE. No: but I'm mixed boils and bad language. I'm a regular Job all
over my body. It's sheer poverty of blood, and I don't see any chance
of getting richer--either way.

BLAYNE. Can't you take leave?

DOONE. That's the pull you Army men have over us. Ten days are nothing
in your sight. _I'm_ so important that Government can't find a
substitute if I go away. Ye-es, I'd like to be Gaddy, whoever his wife
may be.

CURTISS. You've passed the turn of life that Mackesy was speaking of.

DOONE. Indeed I have, but I never yet had the brutality to ask a woman
to share my life out here.

BLAYNE. On my soul I believe you're right. I'm thinking of Mrs. Cockley.
The woman's an absolute wreck.

DOONE. Exactly. Because she stays down here. The only way to keep her
fit would be to send her to the Hills for eight months--and the same
with any woman. I fancy I see myself taking a wife on those terms.

MACKESY. With the rupee at one and sixpence. The little Doones would
be little Dehra Doones, with a fine Mussoorie _chi-chi_ anent to bring
home for the holidays.

CURTISS. And a pair of be-ewtiful _sambhur_-horns for Doone to wear,
free of expense, presented by---

DOONE. Yes, it's an enchanting prospect. By the way, the rupee hasn't
done falling yet. The time will come when we shall think ourselves
lucky if we only lose half our pay.

CURTISS. Surely a third's loss enough. Who gains by the arrangement?
That's what I want to know.

BLAYNE. The Silver Question! I'm going to bed if you begin squabbling.
Thank Goodness, here's Anthony--looking like a ghost.

_Enter_ ANTHONY, _Indian Medical Staff, very white and tired._

ANTHONY. 'Evening, Blayne. It's raining in sheets. _Whiskey-peg, lao,
Khitmatgar._ The roads are something ghastly.

CURTISS. How's Mingle?

ANTHONY. Very bad, and more frightened. I handed him over to Fewton.
Mingle might just as well have called him in the first place, instead
of bothering me.

BLAYNE. He's a nervous little chap. What has he got, this time?

ANTHONY. 'Can't quite say. A very bad tummy and a blue funk so far.
He asked me at once if it was cholera, and I told him not to be a fool.
That soothed him.

CURTISS. Poor devil! The funk does half the business in a man of that
build.

ANTHONY. (_Lighting a cheroot._) I firmly believe the funk will kill
him if he stays down. You know the amount of trouble he's been giving
Fewton for the last three weeks. He's doing his very best to frighten
himself into the grave.

GENERAL CHORUS. Poor little devil! Why doesn't he get away?

ANTHONY. 'Can't. He has his leave all right, but he's so dipped he
can't take it, and I don't think his name on paper would raise four
annas. That's in confidence, though.

MACKESY. All the Station knows it.

ANTHONY. 'I suppose I shall have to die here,' he said, squirming all
across the bed. He's quite made up his mind to Kingdom Come. And I
_know_ he has nothing more than a wet-weather tummy if he could only
keep a hand on himself.

BLAYNE. That's bad. That's very bad. Poor little Miggy. Good little
chap, too. I say--

ANTHONY. What do you say?

BLAYNE. Well, look here--anyhow. If it's like that--as you say--I say
fifty.

CURTISS. I say fifty.

MACKESY. I go twenty better.

DOONE. Bloated Croesus of the Bar! I say fifty. Jervoise, what do
you say? Hi! Wake up!

JERVOISE. Eh? What's that? What's that?

CURTISS. We want a hundred rupees from you. You're a bachelor drawing
a gigantic income, and there's a man in a hole.

JERVOISE. What man? Any one dead?

BLAYNE. No, but he'll die if you don't give the hundred. Here! Here's
a peg-voucher. You can see what we've signed for, and Anthony's man
will come round to-morrow to collect it. So there will be no trouble.

JERVOISE. (Signing.) One hundred, E. M. J. There you are (feebly). It
isn't one of your jokes, is it?

BLAYNE. No, it really _is_ wanted. Anthony, you were the biggest
poker-winner last week, and you've defrauded the tax-collector too
long. Sign!

ANTHONY. Let's see. Three fifties and a seventy--two twenty--three
twenty--say four hundred and twenty. That'll give him a month clear
at the Hills. Many thanks, you men. I'll send round the _chaprassi_
tomorrow.

CURTISS. You must engineer his taking the stuff, and of course you
mustn't--

ANTHONY. Of course. It would never do. He'd weep with gratitude over
his evening drink.

BLAYNE. That's just what he would do, damn him. Oh! I say, Anthony,
you pretend to know everything. Have you heard about Gaddy?

ANTHONY. No. Divorce Court at last?

BLAYNE. Worse. He's engaged!

ANTHONY. How much? He _can't_ be!

BLAYNE. He _is_. He's going to be married in a few weeks. Markyn told
me at the Judge's this evening. It's _pukka_.

ANTHONY. You don't say so? Holy Moses! There'll be a shine in the tents
of Kedar.

CURTISS. 'Regiment cut up rough, think you?

ANTHONY. 'Don't know anything about the Regiment.

MACKESY. It is bigamy, then?

ANTHONY. Maybe. Do you mean to say that you men have forgotten, or is
there more charity in the world than I thought?

DOONE. You don't look pretty when you are trying to keep a secret. You
bloat. Explain.

ANTHONY. Mrs. Herriott!

BLAYNE. (_After a long pause, to the room generally._) It's my notion
that we are a set of fools.

MACKESY. Nonsense. _That_ business was knocked on the head last season.
Why, young Mallard--

ANTHONY. Mallard was a candlestick, paraded as such. Think awhile.
Recollect last season and the talk then. Mallard or no Mallard, did
Gaddy ever talk to any other woman?

CURTISS. There's something in that. It _was_ slightly noticeable now
you come to mention it. But she's at Naini Tal and he's at Simla.

ANTHONY. He had to go to Simla to look after a globetrotter relative
of his--a person with a title. Uncle or aunt.

BLAYNE. And there he got engaged. No law prevents a man growing tired
of a woman.

ANTHONY. Except that he mustn't do it till the woman is tired of him.
And the Herriott woman was not that.

CURTISS. She may be now. Two months of Naini Tal work wonders.

DOONE. Curious thing how some women carry a Fate with them. There was
a Mrs. Deegie in the Central Provinces whose men invariably fell away
and got married. It became a regular proverb with us when I was down
there. I remember three men desperately devoted to her, and they all,
one after another, took wives.

CURTISS. That's odd. Now I should have thought that Mrs. Deegie's
influence would have led them to take other men's wives. It ought to
have made them afraid of the judgment of Providence.

ANTHONY. Mrs. Herriott will make Gaddy afraid of something more than
the judgment of Providence, I fancy.

BLAYNE. Supposing things are as you say, he'll be a fool to face her.
He'll sit tight at Simla.

ANTHONY. 'Shouldn't be a bit surprised if he went off to Naini to
explain. He's an unaccountable sort of man, and she's likely to be a
more than unaccountable woman.

DOONE. What makes you take her character away so confidently?

ANTHONY. _Primum tempus_. Gaddy was her first, and a woman doesn't
allow her first man to drop away without expostulation. She justifies
the first transfer of affection to herself by swearing that it is for
ever and ever. Consequently--

BLAYNE. Consequently, we are sitting here till past one o'clock, talking
scandal like a set of Station cats. Anthony, it's all your fault. We
were perfectly respectable till you came in. Go to bed. I'm off.
Good-night all.

CURTISS. Past one! It's past two, by Jove, and here's the _khit_ coming
for the late charge. Just Heavens! One, two, three, four, _five_ rupees
to pay for the pleasure of saying that a poor little beast of a woman
is no better than she should be. I'm ashamed of myself. Go to bed, you
slanderous villains, and if I'm sent to Beora to-morrow, be prepared
to hear I'm dead before paying my card account!




THE TENTS OF KEDAR

  Only why should it be with pain at all,
  Why must I 'twixt the leaves of coronal
     Put any kiss of pardon on thy brow?
  Why should the other women know so much,
  And talk together:--Such the look and such
  The smile he used to love with, then as now.
            _Any Wife to any Husband_.

SCENE.-_A Naini Tal dinner for thirty-four. Plate, wines, crockery,
and khitmatgars carefully calculated to scale of Rs. 6000 per mensem,
less Exchange. Table split lengthways by bank of flowers._

MRS. HERRIOTT. (_After conversation has risen to proper pitch._) Ah!
'Didn't see you in the crush in the drawing-room. (_Sotto voce._) Where
_have_ you been all this while, Pip?

CAPTAIN GADSBY. (_Turning from regularly ordained dinner partner and
settling hock glasses._) Good evening. (_Sotto voce._) Not quite so
loud another time. You've no notion how your voice carries. (_Aside._)
So much for shirking the written explanation. It'll have to be a verbal
one now. Sweet prospect! How on earth am I to tell her that I am a
respectable, engaged member of society and it's all over between us?

MRS. H. I've a heavy score against you. Where were you at the Monday
Pop? Where were you on Tuesday? Where were you at the Lamonts' tennis?
I was looking everywhere.

CAPT. G. For me! Oh, I was alive somewhere, I suppose. (_Aside_.) It's
for Minnie's sake, but it's going to be dashed unpleasant.

MRS. H. Have I done anything to offend you? I never meant it if I have.
I couldn't help going for a ride with the Vaynor man. It was promised
a week before you came up.

CAPT. G. I didn't know--

MRS. H. It really _was_.

CAPT. G. Anything about it, I mean.

MRS. H. What has upset you to-day? All these days? You haven't been
near me for four whole days--nearly one hundred hours. Was it _kind_
of you, Pip? And I've been looking forward so much to your coming.

CAPT. G. Have you?

MRS. H. You _know_ I have! I've been as foolish as a schoolgirl about
it. I made a little calendar and put it in my card-case, and every
time the twelve o'clock gun went off I scratched out a square and said:
'That brings me nearer to Pip. _My_ Pip!'

CAPT. G. (_With an uneasy laugh_.) What will Mackler think if you
neglect him so?

MRS. H. And it hasn't brought you nearer. You seem farther away than
ever. Are you sulking about something? I know your temper.

CAPT. G. No.

MRS. H. Have I grown old in the last few months, then? (_Reaches forward
to bank of flowers for menu-card_.)

MRS. H. (_To partner_.) Oh, thanks. I didn't see.

MRS. H. _Keeps her arm at full stretch for three seconds_.

PARTNER ON LEFT. Allow me. (_Hands menu-card_.) (_Turns right again_.)
Is anything in me changed at all?

CAPT. G. For Goodness' sake go on with your dinner! You must eat
something. Try one of those cutlet arrangements. (_Aside_.) And I
fancied she had good shoulders, once upon a time! What an ass a man
can make of himself!

MRS. H. (_Helping herself to a paper frill, seven peas, some stamped
carrots and a spoonful of gravy_.) That isn't an answer. Tell me whether
I have done anything.

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) If it isn't ended here there will be a ghastly
scene somewhere else. If only I'd written to her and stood the
racket--at long range! (_To Khitmatgar_.) _Han! Simpkin do._ (_Aloud_.)
I'll tell you later on.

MRS. H. Tell me _now_. It must be some foolish misunderstanding, and
you know that there was to be nothing of that sort between us. _We_,
of all people in the world, can't afford it. Is it the Vaynor man, and
don't you like to say so? On my honour--

CAPT. G. I haven't given the Vaynor man a thought.

MRS. H. But how d'you know that _I_ haven't?

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) Here's my chance and may the Devil help me through
with it. (_Aloud and measuredly_.) Believe me, I do not care how often
or how tenderly you think of the Vaynor man.

MRS. H. I wonder if you mean that.--Oh, what _is_ the good of squabbling
and pretending to misunderstand when you are only up for so short a
time? Pip, don't be a stupid!

_Follows a pause, during which he crosses his left leg over his right
and continues his dinner_.

CAPT. G. (_In answer to the thunderstorm in her eyes_.) Corns--my
worst.

MRS. H. Upon my word, you are the very rudest man in the world! I'll
_never_ do it again.

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) No, I don't think you will; but I wonder what you
will do before it's all over. (_To Khitmatgar_.) _Thorah ur Simpkin
do_.

MRS. H. Well! Haven't you the grace to apologise, bad man?

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) I mustn't let it drift back _now_. Trust a woman
for being as blind as a bat when she won't see.

MRS. H. I'm waiting: or would you like me to dictate a form of apology?

CAPT. G. (_Desperately_.) By all means dictate.

MRS. H. (_Lightly_.) Very well. Rehearse your several Christian names
after me and go on: 'Profess my sincere repentance.'

CAPT. G. 'Sincere repentance.'

MRS. H. 'For having behaved--'

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) At last! I wish to Goodness she'd look away. 'For
having behaved'--as I have behaved, and declare that I am thoroughly
and heartily sick of the whole business, and take this opportunity of
making clear my intention of ending it, now, henceforward, and for
ever. (_Aside_.) If any one had told me I should be such a blackguard--!

MRS. H. (_Shaking a spoonful of potato chips into her plate_.) That's
not a pretty joke.

CAPT. G. No. It's a reality. (_Aside_.) I wonder if smashes of this
kind are always so raw.

MRS. H. Really, Pip, you're getting more absurd every day.

CAPT. G. I don't think you quite understand me. Shall I repeat it?

MRS. H. No! For pity's sake don't do that. It's too terrible, even in
fun.

CAPT. G. I'll let her think it over for a while. But I ought to be
horse-whipped.

MRS. H. I want to know what you meant by what you said just now.

CAPT. G. Exactly what I said. No less.

MRS. H. But what have I done to deserve it? What _have_ I done?

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) If she only wouldn't look at me. (_Aloud and very
slowly, his eyes on his plate_.) D'you remember that evening in July,
before the Rains broke, when you said that the end would have to come
sooner or later--and you wondered for which of us it would come first?

MRS. H. Yes! I was only joking. And you swore that, as long as there
was breath in your body, it should _never_ come. And I believed you.

CAPT. G. (_Fingering menu-card_) Well, it has. That's all.

_A long pause, during which MRS. H. bows her head and rolls the
bread-twist into little pellets:_ G. _stares at the oleanders_.

MRS. H. (_Throwing back her head and laughing naturally_.) They train
us women well, don't they, Pip?

CAPT. G. (_Brutally, touching shirt-stud_.) So far as the expression
goes. (_Aside_.) It isn't in her nature to take things quietly. There'll
be an explosion yet.

MRS. H. (_With a shudder_.) Thank you. B-but even Red Indians allow
people to wriggle when they're being tortured, I believe. (_Slips fan
from girdle and fans slowly: rim of fan level with chin_.)

PARTNER ON LEFT. Very close to-night, isn't it? 'You find it too much
for you?

MRS. H. Oh, no, not in the least. But they really ought to have punkahs,
even in your cool Naini Tal, oughtn't they? (_Turns, dropping fan and
raising eyebrows_.)

CAPT. G. It's all right. (_Aside_.) Here comes the storm!

MRS. H. (_Her eyes on the tablecloth: fan ready in right hand_.) It
was very cleverly managed, Pip, and I congratulate you. You swore--you
never contented yourself with merely saying a thing--you _swore_ that,
as far as lay in your power, you'd make my wretched life pleasant for
me. And you've denied me the consolation of breaking down. I should
have done it--indeed I should. A woman would hardly have thought of
this refinement, my kind, considerate friend. (_Fan-guard as before_.)
You have explained things so tenderly and truthfully, too! You haven't
spoken or written a word of warning, and you have let me believe in
you till the last minute. You haven't condescended to give me your
_reason_ yet. No! A woman could not have managed it half so well. Are
there many _men_ like you in the world?

CAPT. G. I'm sure I don't know. (_To Khitmatgar_.) Ohe! _Simpkin do_.

MRS. H. You call yourself a man of the world, don't you? Do men of the
world behave like Devils when they do a woman the honour to get tired
of her?

CAPT. G. I'm sure I don't know. Don't speak so loud!

MRS. H. Keep us respectable, O Lord, whatever happens! Don't be afraid
of my compromising you. You've chosen your ground far too well, and
I've been properly brought up. (_Lowering fan_.) Haven't you _any_
pity, Pip, except for yourself?

CAPT. G. Wouldn't it be rather impertinent of me to say that I'm sorry
for you?

MRS. H. I think you have said it once or twice before. You're growing
very careful of my feelings. My God, Pip, I was a good woman once! You
_said_ I was. You've made me what I am. What are you going to do with
me? What are you going to do with me? Won't you _say_ that you are
sorry? (_Helps herself to iced asparagus_.)

CAPT. G. I am sorry for you, if you want the pity of such a brute as
I am. I'm _awf'ly_ sorry for you.

MRS. H. Rather tame for a man of the world. Do you think that that
admission clears you?

CAPT. G. What can I do? I can only tell you what I think of myself.
You can't think worse than that?

MRS. H. Oh, yes, I can! And now, will you tell me the reason of all
this? Remorse? Has Bayard been suddenly conscience-stricken?

CAPT. G. (_Angrily, his eyes still lowered_.) No! The thing has come
to an end on my side. That's all. _Mafisch!_

MRS. H. 'That's all. _Mafisch!_' As though I were a Cairene Dragoman.
You used to make prettier speeches. D'you remember when you said---?

CAPT. G. For Heaven's sake don't bring that back! Call me anything
you like and I'll admit it--

MRS. H. But you don't care to be reminded of old lies? If I could hope
to hurt you one-tenth as much as you have hurt me to-night--No, I
wouldn't--I couldn't do it--liar though you are.

CAPT. G. I've spoken the truth.

MRS. H. My _dear_ Sir, you flatter yourself. You have lied over the
reason. Pip, remember that I know you as you don't know yourself. You
have been everything to me, though you are--(_Fan-guard_.) Oh, what
a contemptible _Thing_ it is! And so you are merely tired of me?

CAPT. G. Since you insist upon my repeating it--Yes.

MRS. H. Lie the first. I wish I knew a coarser word. Lie seems so
ineffectual in your case. The fire has just died out and there is no
fresh one? Think for a minute, Pip, if you care whether I despise you
more than I do. Simply _Mafisch_, is it?

CAPT. G. Yes. (_Aside_.) I think I deserve this.

MRS. H. Lie number two. Before the next glass chokes you, tell me her
name.

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.). I'll make her pay for dragging Minnie into the
business! (_Aloud_.) Is it likely?

MRS. H. _Very_ likely if you thought that it would flatter your vanity.
You'd cry my name on the house-tops to make people turn round.

CAPT. G. I wish I had. There would have been an end of this business.

MRS. H. Oh, no, there would not--And so you were going to be virtuous
and _blase_, were you? To come to me and say: 'I've done with you. The
incident is clo-osed.' I ought to be proud of having kept such a man
so long.

CAPT. G. (_Aside_.) It only remains to pray for the end of the dinner.
(_Aloud_.) You know what I think of myself.

MRS. H. As it's the only person in the world you ever _do_ think of,
and as I know your mind thoroughly, I do. You want to get it all over
and-- Oh, I can't keep you back! And you're going--think of it, Pip--to
throw me over for another woman. And you swore that all other women
were-- Pip, my Pip! She _can't_ care for you as I do. Believe me, she
can't! Is it any one that I know?

CAPT. G. Thank Goodness it isn't. (_Aside_.) I expected a cyclone, but
not an earthquake.

MRS. H. She _can't!_ Is there anything that I wouldn't do for you--or
haven't done? And to think that I should take this trouble over you,
knowing what you are! Do you despise me for it?

CAPT. G. (_Wiping his mouth to hide a smile_.) _Again?_ It's entirely
a work of charity on your part.

MRS. H. Ahhh! But I have no right to resent it.--Is she better-looking
than I? Who was it said--?

CAPT G. No--not that!

MRS. H. I'll be more merciful than you were. Don't you know that all
women are alike?

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) Then this is the exception that proves the rule.

MRS. H. _All_ of them! I'll tell you anything you like. I will, upon
my word! They only want the admiration--from anybody--no matter
who--anybody! But there is always _one_ man that they care for more
than any one else in the world, and would sacrifice all the others to.
Oh, _do_ listen! I've kept the Vaynor man trotting after me like a
poodle, and he believes that he is the only man I am interested in.
I'll tell you what he said to me.

CAPT. G. Spare him. (_Aside._) I wonder what _his_ version is.

MRS. H. He's been waiting for me to look at him all through dinner.
Shall I do it, and you can see what an idiot he looks?

CAPT. G. 'But what imports the nomination of this gentleman?'

MRS. H. Watch! (_Sends a glance to the Vaynor man, who tries vainly
to combine a mouthful of ice pudding, a smirk of self-satisfaction,
a glare of intense devotion, and the stolidity of a British dining
countenance._)

CAPT. G. (_Critically._) He doesn't look pretty. Why didn't you wait
till the spoon was out of his mouth?

MRS. H. To amuse you. She'll make an exhibition of you as I've made
of him; and people will laugh at you. Oh, Pip, can't you see that?
It's as plain as the noonday sun. You'll be trotted about and told
lies, and made a fool of like the others. _I_ never made a fool of
you, did I?

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) What a clever little woman it is!

MRS. H. Well, what have you to say?

CAPT. G. I feel better.

MRS. H. Yes, I suppose so, after I have come down to your level. I
couldn't have done it if I hadn't cared for you so much. I have spoken
the truth.

CAPT. G. It doesn't alter the situation.

MRS. H. (_Passionately._) Then she _has_ said that she cares for you!
Don't believe her, Pip. It's a lie--as bad as yours to me!

CAPT. G. Ssssteady! I've a notion that a friend of yours is looking
at you.

MRS. H. He! I _hate_ him. He introduced you to me.

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) And some people would like women to assist in
making the laws. Introduction to imply condonement. (_Aloud._) Well,
you see, if you can remember so far back as that, I couldn't, in common
politeness, refuse the offer.

MRS. H. In common politeness! We have got beyond _that!_

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) Old ground means fresh trouble, (_Aloud._) On my
honour--

MRS. H. Your _what?_ Ha, ha!

CAPT. G. Dishonour, then. She's not what you imagine. I meant to--

MRS. H. Don't tell me anything about her! She _won't_ care for you,
and when you come back, after having made an exhibition of yourself,
you'll fine me occupied with--

CAPT. G. (_Insolently._) You couldn't while I am alive. (_Aside._) If
that doesn't bring her pride to her rescue, nothing will.

MRS. H. (_Drawing herself up_). Couldn't do it? _I?_ (_Softening._)
You're right. I don't believe I could--though you are what you are--a
coward and a liar in grain.

CAPT. G. It doesn't hurt so much after your little lecture--with
demonstrations.

MRS. H. One mass of vanity! Will nothing _ever_ touch you in this life?
There must be a Hereafter if it's only for the benefit of---But you
will have it all to yourself.

CAPT. G. (_Under his eyebrows._) Are you so certain of that?

MRS. H. I shall have had mine in this life; and it will serve me right.

CAPT. G. But the admiration that you insisted on so strongly a moment
ago? (_Aside._) Oh, I _am_ a brute!

MRS. H. (_Fiercely._) Will _that_ console me for knowing that you will
go to her with the same words, the same arguments, and the--the same
pet names you used to me? And if she cares for you, you two will laugh
over my story. Won't that be punishment heavy enough even for me--
even for me?--And it's all useless. That's another punishment.

CAPT. G. (_Feebly._) Oh, come! I'm not so low as you think.

MRS. H. Not now, perhaps, but you will be. Oh, Pip, if a woman flatters
your vanity, there's nothing on earth that you would not tell her; and
no meanness that you would not do. Have I known you so long without
knowing that?

CAPT. G. If you can trust me in nothing else--and I don't see why I
should be trusted--you can count upon my holding my tongue.

MRS. H. If you denied everything you've said this evening and declared
it was all in fun (_a long pause_), I'd trust you. Not otherwise. All
I ask is, don't tell her my name. _Please_ don't. A man might forget:
a woman never would. (_Looks up table and sees hostess beginning to
collect eyes._) So it's all ended, through no fault of mine-- Haven't
I behaved beautifully? I've accepted your dismissal, and you managed
it as cruelly as you could, and I have made you respect my sex, haven't
I? (_Arranging gloves and fan._) I only pray that she'll know you some
day as I know you now. I wouldn't be you then, for I think even your
conceit will be hurt. I hope she'll pay you back the humiliation you've
brought on me. I hope-- No. I don't. I _can't_ give you up! I must
have something to look forward to or I shall go crazy. When it's all
over, come back to me, come back to me, and you'll find that you're
my Pip still!

CAPT. G. (_Very clearly._) 'False move, and you pay for it. It's a
girl!

MRS. H. (_Rising._) Then it _was_ true! They said--but I wouldn't
insult you by asking. A girl! _I_ was a girl not very long ago. Be
good to her, Pip. I daresay she believes in you.

_Goes out with an uncertain smile. He watches her through the door,
and settles into a chair as the men redistribute themselves._

CAPT. G. Now, if there is any Power who looks after this world, will
He kindly tell me what I have done? (_Reaching out for the claret, and
half aloud._) What _have_ I done?




WITH ANY AMAZEMENT

And are not afraid with any amazement.
    --_Marriage service_.

SCENE.-_A bachelor's bedroom--toilet-table arranged with unnatural
neatness_. CAPTAIN GADSBY _asleep and snoring heavily. Time_, 10.30
A. M.--_a glorious autumn day at Simla. Enter delicately_ CAPTAIN
MAFFLIM of GADSBY'S regiment. Looks at sleeper, and shakes his head
murmuring 'Poor Gaddy.' Performs violent fantasia with hair-brushes
on chair-back_.

CAPT. M. Wake up, my sleeping beauty! (_Roars_.)

  'Uprouse ye, then, my merry merry men!
  It is our opening day!
  It is our opening da-ay!'

Gaddy, the little dicky-birds have been billing and cooing for ever
so long; and I'm here!

CAPT. G. (_Sitting up and yawning_.) 'Mornin'. This is awf'ly good of
you, old fellow. Most awf'ly good of you. 'Don't know what I should
do without you. On my soul, I don't. 'Haven't slept a wink all night.

CAPT. M. I didn't get in till half-past eleven. 'Had a look at you
then, and you seemed to be sleeping as soundly as a condemned criminal.

CAPT. G. Jack, if you want to make those disgustingly worn-out jokes,
you'd better go away. (With _portentous gravity_.) It's the happiest
day in my life.

CAPT. M. (Chuckling grimly.) Not by a very long chalk, my son. You're
going through some of the most refined torture you've ever known. But
be calm. I am with you. 'Shun! _Dress_!

CAPT. G. Eh! Wha-at?

CAPT. M. DO you suppose that you are your own master for the next
twelve hours? If you _do_, of course--- (_Makes for the door_.)

CAPT. G. No! For Goodness' sake, old man, don't do that! You'll see
me through, won't you? I've been mugging up that beastly drill, and
can't remember a line of it.

CAPT. M. (_Overhauling_ G's _uniform_.) Go and tub. Don't bother me.
I'll give you ten minutes to dress in.

_Interval, filled by the noise as of one splashing in the bath-room_.

CAPT. G. (_Emerging from dressing-room_.) What time is it?

CAPT. M. Nearly eleven.

CAPT. G. Five hours more. O Lord!

CAPT. M. (_Aside_.) 'First sign of funk, that. 'Wonder if it's going
to spread. (Aloud.) Come along to breakfast.

CAPT. G. I can't eat anything. I don't want any breakfast.

CAPT. M. (_Aside_.) So early! (_Aloud_.) Captain Gadsby, I _order_ you
to eat breakfast, and a dashed good breakfast, too. None of your bridal
airs and graces with me!

Leads G. _downstairs, and stands over him while he eats two chops_.

CAPT. G. (_Who has looked at his watch thrice in the last five
minutes_.) What time is it?

CAPT. M. Time to come for a walk. Light up.

CAPT. G. I haven't smoked for ten days, and I won't _now_. (_Takes
cheroot which M. has cut for him, and blows smoke through his nose
luxuriously_.) We aren't going down the Mall, are we?

CAPT. M. (_Aside_.) They're all alike in these stages. (_Aloud_.) No,
my Vestal. We're going along the quietest road we can find.

CAPT. G. Any chance of seeing Her?

CAPT. M. Innocent! No! Come along, and, if you want me for the final
obsequies, don't cut my eye out with your stick.

CAPT. G. (_Spinning round_.) I say, isn't She the dearest creature
that ever walked? What's the time? What comes after 'wilt thou take
this woman'?

CAPT. M, You go for the ring. R'clect it'll be on the top of my
right-hand little ringer, and just be careful how you draw it off,
because I shall have the Verger's fees somewhere in my glove.

CAPT. G. (_Walking forward hastily_.) D---the Verger! Come along! It's
past twelve and I haven't seen Her since yesterday evening. (Spinning
round again.) She's an absolute angel, Jack, and She's a dashed deal
too good for me. Look here, does She come up the aisle on my arm, or
how?

CAPT. M. If I thought that there was the least chance of your
remembering anything for two consecutive minutes, I'd tell you. Stop
passaging about like that!

CAPT. G. (_Halting in the middle of the road_.) I say, Jack.

CAPT. M. Keep quiet for another ten minutes if you can, you lunatic;
and _walk!_

_The two tramp at five miles an hour for fifteen minutes_.

CAPT. G. What's the time? How about that cursed wedding-cake and the
slippers? They don't throw 'em about in church, do they?

CAPT. M. In-variably. The Padre leads off with his boots.

CAPT. G. Confound your silly soul! Don't make fun of me. I can't stand
it, and I won't!

CAPT. M. (_Untroubled_.) So-ooo, old horse! You'll have to sleep for
a couple of hours this afternoon.

CAPT. G. (_Spinning round_) I'm _not_ going to be treated like a dashed
child. Understand that!

CAPT. M. (_Aside_) Nerves gone to fiddle-strings. What a day we're
having! (_Tenderly putting his hand on G's. shoulder_) My David, how
long have you known this Jonathan? Would I come up here to make a fool
of you-after all these years?

CAPT. G. (_Penitently_.) I know, I know, Jack--but I'm as upset as I
can be. Don't mind what I say. Just hear me run through the drill and
see if I've got it all right:---

'To have and to hold for better or worse, as it was in the beginning,
is now, and ever shall be, world without end, so help me God. Amen.'

CAPT. M. (_Suffocating with suppressed laughter_) Yes. That's about
the gist of it. I'll prompt if you get into a hat.

CAPT. G. (_Earnestly_) Yes, you'll stick by me, Jack, won't you? I'm
awf'ly happy, but I don't mind telling YOU that I'm in a blue funk!

CAPT. M. (_Gravely_) Are you? I should never have noticed it. You don't
LOOK like it.

CAPT. G. Don't I? That's all right. (_Spinning round_.) On my soul and
honour, Jack, She's the sweetest little angel that ever came down from
the sky. There isn't a woman on earth fit to speak to Her.

CAPT. M. (_Aside_.) And this is old Gaddy! (_Aloud_.) Go on if it
relieves you.

CAPT. G. You can laugh! That's all you wild asses of bachelors are fit
for.

CAPT. M. (_Drawling_.) You never WOULD wait for the troop to come up.
You aren't quite married yet, y' know.

CAPT. G. Ugh! That reminds me. I don't believe I shall be able to get
into my boots. Let's go home and try 'em on! (_Hurries forward_.)

CAPT. M. 'Wouldn't be in _your_ shoes for anything that Asia has to
offer.

CAPT. G. (_Spinning round_.) That just shows your hideous blackness
of soul-your dense stupidity-your brutal narrow-mindedness. There's
only one fault about you. You're the best of good fellows, and I don't
know what I should have done without you, but-you aren't married.
(_Wags his head gravely_.) Take a wife, Jack.

CAPT. M. (_With a face like a wall_.) Ya-as. Whose for choice?

CAPT. G. If you're going to be a blackguard, I'm going on--What's the
time?

CAPT. M. (_Hums_.)---

  'An' since 'twas very clear we drank only ginger-beer,
  Faith, there must ha'been some stingo in the ginger.'

Come back, you maniac. I'm going to take you home, and you're going
to lie down.

CAPT. G. What on earth do I want to lie down for?

CAPT. M. Give me a light from your cheroot and see.

CAPT. G. (_Watching cheroot-butt quiver like a tuning-fork_.) Sweet
state I'm in!

CAPT. M. You are. I'll get you a peg and you'll go to sleep.

_They return and M. compounds a four-finger peg_.

CAPT. G. O _bus! bus!_ It'll make me as drunk as an owl.

CAPT. M. Curious thing, 'twon't have the slightest effect on you. Drink
it off, chuck yourself down there, and go to bye-bye.

CAPT. G. It's absurd. I shan't sleep. I _know_ I shan't!

    _Falls into heavy doze at end of seven minutes_. CAPT. M.
    _watches him tenderly_.

CAPT. M. Poor old Gaddy! I've seen a few turned off before, but never
one who went to the gallows in this condition. 'Can't tell how it
affects 'em, though. It's the thoroughbreds that sweat when they're
backed into double-harness.-And that's the man who went through the
guns at Amdheran like a devil possessed of devils. (_Leans over_ G.)
But this is worse than the guns, old pal--worse than the guns, isn't
it? (G. t_urns in his sleep, and M. touches him clumsily on the
forehead_.) Poor, dear old Gaddy! Going like the rest of 'em-going
like the rest of 'em---Friend that sticketh closer than a brother---
eight years. Dashed bit of a slip of a girl-eight weeks! And-where's
your friend? (_Smokes disconsolately till church clock strikes three_.)

CAPT. M. Up with you! Get into your kit.

CAPT. G. Already? Isn't it too soon? Hadn't I better have a shave?

CAPT. M. NO! You're all right. (_Aside_.) He'd chip his chin to pieces.

CAPT. G. What's the hurry?

CAPT. M. You've got to be there first.

CAPT. G. To be stared at?

CAPT. M. Exactly. You're part of the show. Where's the burnisher? Your
spurs are in a shameful state.

CAPT. G. (_Gruffly_) Jack, I be damned if you shall do that for me.

CAPT. M. (_More gruffly._) Dry up and get dressed! If I choose to
clean your spurs, you're under _my_ orders.

CAPT. G. _dresses_. M. _follows suit._

CAPT. M. (_Critically, walking round._) M'yes, you'll do. Only don't
look so like a criminal. Ring, gloves, fees--that's all right for me.
Let your moustache alone. Now, if the ponies are ready, we'll go.

CAPT. G. (_Nervously._) It's much too soon. Let's light up! Let's have
a peg! Let's--

CAPT. M. Let's make bally asses of ourselves!

BELLS. (_Without._)--

      'Good--peo--ple--all
      To prayers--we call."

CAPT. M. There go the bells! Come on--unless you'd rather not. (_They
ride off._)

BELLS.--

  'We honour the King
  And Brides joy do bring--
  Good tidings we tell,
  And ring the Dead's knell.'

CAPT. G. (_Dismounting at the door of the Church._) I say, aren't we
much too soon? There are no end of people inside. I say, aren't we
much too late? Stick by me, Jack! What the devil do I do?

CAPT. M. Strike an attitude at the head of the aisle and wait for Her.
(G. _groans as_ M. _wheels him into position before three hundred
eyes._)

CAPT. M. (_Imploringly._) Gaddy, if you love me, for pity's sake, for
the Honour of the Regiment, stand up! Chuck yourself into your uniform!
Look like a man! I've got to speak to the Padre a minute. (G. _breaks
into a gentle perspiration._) If you wipe your face I'll _never_ be
your best man again. Stand _up!_ (G. _trembles visibly._)

CAPT. M. (_Returning._) She's coming now. Look out when the music
starts. There's the organ beginning to clack.

_Bride steps out of 'rickshaw at Church door._ G. _catches a glimpse
of her and takes heart._

ORGAN.--

  'The Voice that breathed o'er Eden,
  That earliest marriage day,
  The primal marriage-blessing,
  It hath not passed away.'

CAPT. M. (_Watching_ G.) By Jove! He _is_ looking well. 'Didn't think
he had it in him.

CAPT. G. How long does this hymn go on for?

CAPT. M. It will be over directly. (_Anxiously._) Beginning to bleach
and gulp? Hold on, Gaddy, and think o' the Regiment.

CAPT. G. (_Measuredly._) I say, there's a big brown lizard crawling
up that wall.

CAPT. M. My Sainted Mother! The last stage of collapse!

_Bride comes up to left of altar, lifts her eyes once to_ G. _who is
suddenly smitten mad._

CAPT. G. (_To himself again and again._) Little Featherweight's a
woman--a woman! And I thought she was a little girl.

CAPT. M. (_In a whisper._) Form the halt--inward _wheel._

CAPT. G. _obeys mechanically and the ceremony proceeds._

PADRE. . . . only unto her as long as ye both shall live?

CAPT. G. (_His throat useless._) Ha-hmmm!

CAPT. M. Say you will or you won't. There's no second deal here.

_Bride gives response with perfect coolness, and is given away by the
father._

CAPT. G. (_Thinking to show his learning._) Jack, give me away now,
_quick!_

CAPT. M. You're given yourself away quite enough. Her _right_ hand,
man! Repeat! Repeat! 'Theodore Philip.' Have you forgotten your own
name?

CAPT. G. _stumbles through Affirmation, which Bride repeats without a
tremor._

CAPT. M. Now the ring! Follow the Padre! Don't pull off my glove! Here
it is! Great Cupid, he's found his voice!

G. _repeats Troth in a voice to be heard to the end of the Church and
turns on his heel._

CAPT. M. (_Desperately._) Rein back! Back to your troop! 'Tisn't half
legal yet.

PADRE. . . . joined together let no man put asunder.

CAPT. G. _paralysed with fear jibs after Blessing._

CAPT. M. (_Quickly._) On your own front--one length. Take her with
you. I don't come. You've nothing to say. (CAPT. G. _jingles up to
altar._)

  CAPT. M. (_In a piercing rattle meant to be a whisper._)
  Kneel, you stiff-necked ruffian! Kneel!

PADRE. . . . whose daughters are ye so long as ye do well and are not
afraid with any amazement.

  CAPT. M. Dismiss! Break off! Left wheel!
  _All troop to vestry. They sign._

CAPT. M. Kiss Her, Gaddy.

CAPT. G. (_Rubbing the ink into his glove._) Eh! Wha--at?

CAPT. M. (_Taking one pace to Bride._) If you don't, I shall.

CAPT. G. (_Interposing an arm._) Not this journey!

       _General kissing, in which_ CAPT. G. _is pursued by
       unknown female._

CAPT. G. (_Faintly to_ M.) This is Hades! Can I wipe my face now?

CAPT. M. My responsibility has ended. Better ask _Missis_ Gadsby.

       CAPT. G. _winces as though shot and procession is
       Mendelssohned out of Church to house, where usual
       tortures take place over the wedding-cake._

CAPT. M. (_At table._) Up with you, Gaddy. They expect a speech.

CAPT. G. (_After three minutes' agony._) Ha-hmmm. (_Thunders of
applause._)

CAPT. M. Doocid good, for a first attempt. Now go and change your kit
while Mamma is weeping over--'the Missus.' (CAPT. G. _disappears._
CAPT. M. _starts up tearing his hair._) It's not _half_ legal. Where
are the shoes? Get an _ayah._

AYAH. Missie Captain Sahib done gone _band karo_ all the _jutis._

CAPT. M. (_Brandishing scabbarded sword._) Woman, produce those shoes!
Some one lend me a bread-knife. We mustn't crack Gaddy's head more
than it is. (_Slices heel off white satin slipper and puts slipper up
his sleeve._) Where is the Bride? (_To the company at large._) Be
tender with that rice. It's a heathen custom. Give me the big bag.

       _Bride slips out quietly into 'rickshaw and departs
       towards the sunset._

CAPT. M. (_In the open._) Stole away, by Jove! So much, the worse for
Gaddy! Here he is. Now Gaddy, this'll be livelier than Amdheran! Where's
your horse?

CAPT. G. (_Furiously, seeing that the women are out of earshot._) Where
the ---- is my _Wife?_

CAPT. M. Half-way to Mahasu by this time. You'll have to ride like
Young Lochinvar.

_Horse comes round on his hind legs; refuses to let G. handle him._

CAPT. G. Oh you will, will you? Get round, you brute-you hog-you beast!
Get _round!_

_Wrenches horse's head over, nearly breaking lower jaw; swings himself
into saddle, and sends home both spurs in the midst of a spattering
gale of Best Patna._

CAPT. M. For your life and your love--ride, Gaddy!--And God bless you!

_Throws half a pound of rice at G., who disappears, bowed forward on
the saddle, in a cloud of sunlit dust._

CAPT. M. I've lost old Gaddy. (_Lights cigarette and strolls off,
singing absently_):--

  'You may carve it on his tombstone, you may cut it on his card,
  That a young man married is a young man marred!'

MISS DEERCOURT. (_From her horse._) Really, Captain Mafflin! You are
more plain spoken than polite!

CAPT. M. (_Aside._) They say marriage is like cholera. 'Wonder who'll
be the next victim.

_White satin slipper slides from his sleeve and falls at his feet.
Left wondering._




THE GARDEN OF EDEN

And ye shall be as--Gods!

SCENE.--_Thymy grass-plot at back of the Mahasu dak-bungalow,
overlooking little wooded valley. On the left, glimpse of the Dead
Forest of Fagoo; on the right, Simla Hills. In background, line of the
Snows._ CAPTAIN GADSBY, _now three weeks a husband, is smoking the
pipe of peace on a rug in the sunshine. Banjo and tobacco-pouch on
rug. Overhead the Fagoo eagles._ MRS. G. _comes out of bungalow._

MRS. G. My husband!

CAPT. G. (_Lazily, with intense enjoyment._) Eh, wha-at? Say that
again.

MRS. G. I've written to Mamma and told her that we shall be back on
the 17th.

CAPT. G. Did you give her my love?

MRS. G. No, I kept all that for myself. (_Sitting down by his side._)
I thought you wouldn't mind.

CAPT. G. (_With mock sternness._) I object awf'ly. How did you know
that it was yours to keep?

MRS. G. I guessed, Phil.

CAPT. G. (_Rapturously._) _Lit-tle_ Featherweight!

MRS. G. I _won't_ be called those sporting pet names, bad boy.

CAPT. G. You'll be called anything I choose. Has it ever occurred to
you, Madam, that you are my Wife?

MRS. G. It has. I haven't ceased wondering at it yet.

CAPT. G. Nor I. It seems so strange; and yet, somehow, it doesn't.
(_Confidently._) You see, it could have been no one else.

MRS. G. (_Softly._) No. No one else--for me or for you. It must have
been _all_ arranged from the beginning. Phil, tell me again what made
you care for me.

CAPT. G. How could I help it? You were _you_, you know.

MRS. G. Did you ever want to help it? Speak the truth!

CAPT. G. (_A twinkle in his eye._) I did, darling, just at the first.
But only at the very first. (_Chuckles._) I called you--stoop low and
I'll whisper--'a little beast.' Ho! Ho! Ho!

MRS. G. (_Taking him by the moustache and making him sit up._)
'A--little--beast!' Stop laughing over your crime! And yet you had
the--the--awful cheek to propose to me!

CAPT. G. I'd changed my mind then. And you weren't a little beast any
more.

MRS. G. Thank you, Sir! And when was I ever?

CAPT. G. _Never!_ But that first day, when you gave me tea in that
peach-coloured muslin gown thing, you looked--you did indeed, dear--such
an absurd little mite. And I didn't know what to say to you.

MRS. G. (_Twisting moustache._) So you said 'little beast.' Upon my
word, Sir! _I_ called _you_ a 'Crrrreature,' but I wish now I had
called you something worse.

CAPT. G. (_Very meekly._) I apologise, but you're hurting me awf'ly.
(_Interlude._) You're welcome to torture me again on those terms.

MRS. G. Oh, _why_ did you let me do it?

CAPT. G. (_Looking across valley._) No reason in particular, but--if
it amused you or did you any good--you might--wipe those dear little
boots of yours on me.

MRS. G. (_Stretching out her hands._) Don't! Oh, don't! Philip, my
King, _please_ don't talk like that. It's how _I_ feel. You're so much
too good for me. So much too good!

CAPT. G. Me! I'm not fit to put my arm round you. (_Puts it round._)

MRS. G. Yes, you are. But I--what have I ever done?

CAPT. G. Given me a wee bit of your heart, haven't you, my Queen?

MRS. G. _That's_ nothing. Any one would do _that._ They cou--couldn't
help it.

CAPT. G. Pussy, you'll make me horribly conceited. Just when I was
beginning to feel so humble, too.

MRS. G. Humble! I don't believe it's in your character.

CAPT. G. What do you know of my character, Impertinence?

MRS. G. Ah, but I shall, shan't I, Phil? I shall have time in all the
years and years to come, to know everything about you; and there will
be no secrets between us.

CAPT. G. Little witch! I believe you know me thoroughly already.

MRS. G. I think I can guess. You're selfish?

CAPT. G. Yes.

MRS. G. Foolish?

CAPT. G. _Very._

MRS. G. And a dear?

CAPT. G. That is as my lady pleases.

MRS. G. Then your lady _is_ pleased. (_A pause._) D'you know that we're
two solemn, serious, grown-up people--

CAPT. G. (_Tilting her straw hat over her eyes._) You grown-up! Pooh!
You're a baby.

MRS. G. And we're talking nonsense.

CAPT. G. Then let's go on talking nonsense. I rather like it. Pussy,
I'll tell you a secret. Promise not to repeat?

MRS. G. Ye--es. Only to you.

CAPT. G. I love you.

MRS. G. Re-ally! For how long?

CAPT. G. For ever and ever.

MRS. G. That's a long time.

CAPT. G. 'Think so? It's the shortest _I_ can do with.

MRS. G. You're getting quite clever.

CAPT. G. I'm talking to _you._

MRS. G. Prettily turned. Hold up your stupid old head and I'll pay you
for it!

CAPT. G. (_Affecting supreme contempt._) Take it yourself if you want
it.

MRS. G. I've a great mind to--and I will! (_Takes it and is repaid
with interest._)

CAPT. G. Little Featherweight, it's my opinion that we _are_ a couple
of idiots.

MRS. G. We're the only two sensible people in the world! Ask the eagle.
He's coming by.

CAPT. G. Ah! I dare say he's seen a good many sensible people at Mahasu.
They say that those birds live for ever so long.

MRS. G. How long?

CAPT. G. A hundred and twenty years.

MRS. G. A hundred and twenty years! O-oh! And in a hundred and twenty
years where will these two sensible people be?

CAPT. G. What _does_ it matter so long as we are together now?

MRS. G. (_Looking round the horizon._) Yes. Only you and I--I and
you--in the whole wide, wide world until the end. (_Sees the line of
the Snows._) How big and quiet the hills look! D'you think they care
for us?

CAPT. G. 'Can't say I've consulted 'em particularly. _I_ care, and
that's enough for me.

MRS. G. (_Drawing nearer to him._) Yes, now--but afterwards. What's
that little black blur on the Snows?

CAPT. G. A snowstorm, forty miles away. You'll see it move, as the
wind carries it across the face of that spur, and then it will be all
gone.

MRS. G. And then it will be all gone. (_Shivers._)

CAPT. G. (_Anxiously._) 'Not chilled, pet, are you? 'Better let me get
your cloak.

MRS. G. No. Don't leave me, Phil. Stay here. I believe I am afraid.
Oh, why are the hills so _horrid!_ Phil, promise me, promise me that
you'll _always_ love me.

CAPT. G. What's the trouble, darling? I can't promise any more than
I have; but I'll promise that again and again if you like.

MRS. G. (_Her head on his shoulder._) _Say_ it, then--say it!
N-no--don't! The--the--eagles would laugh. (_Recovering._) My husband,
you've married a little goose.

CAPT. G. (_Very tenderly._) Have I? I am content whatever she is, so
long as she is mine.

MRS. G. (_Quickly._) Because she is yours or because she is me mineself?

CAPT. G. Because she is both. (_Piteously._) I'm not clever, dear, and
I don't think I can make myself understood properly.

MRS. G. _I_ understand. Pip, will you tell me something?

CAPT. G. Anything you like. (_Aside._) I wonder what's coming now.

MRS. G. (_Haltingly, her eyes lowered._) You told me once in the old
days--centuries and centuries ago--that you had been engaged before.
I didn't say anything--_then._

CAPT. G. (_Innocently._) Why not?

MRS. G. (_Raising her eyes to his._) Because--because I was afraid of
losing you, my heart. But now--tell about it--_please._

CAPT. G. There's nothing to tell. I was awf'ly old then--nearly two
and twenty--and she was _quite_ that.

MRS. G. That means she was older than you. I shouldn't like her to
have been younger. Well?

CAPT. G. Well, I fancied myself in love and raved about a bit, and--oh,
yes, by Jove! I made up poetry. Ha! Ha!

MRS. G. You never wrote any for _me!_ What happened?

CAPT. G. I came out here, and the whole thing went _phut._ She wrote
to say that there had been a mistake, and then she married.

MRS. G. Did she care for you much?

CAPT. G. No. At least she didn't show it as far as I remember.

MRS. G. As far as you remember! Do you remember her name? (_Hears it
and bows her head._) Thank you, my husband.

CAPT. G. Who but you had the right? Now, Little Featherweight, have
you ever been mixed up in any dark and dismal tragedy?

MRS. G. If you call me Mrs. Gadsby, p'raps I'll tell.

CAPT. G. (_Throwing Parade rasp into his voice._) Mrs. Gadsby, confess!

MRS. G. Good Heavens, Phil! I never knew that you could speak in that
terrible voice.

CAPT. G. You don't know half my accomplishments yet. Wait till we are
settled in the Plains, and I'll show you how I bark at my troop. You
were going to say, darling?

MRS. G. I--I don't like to, after that voice. (_Tremulously._) Phil,
never you _dare_ to speak to me in that tone, whatever I may do!

CAPT. G. My poor little love! Why, you're shaking all over. I _am_ so
sorry. Of course I never meant to upset you. Don't tell me anything.
I'm a brute.

MRS. G. No, you aren't, and I _will_ tell--There was a man.

CAPT. G. (_Lightly._) Was there? Lucky man!

MRS. G. (_In a whisper._) And I thought I cared for him.

CAPT. G. Still luckier man! Well?

MRS. G. And I thought I cared for him--and I didn't--and then you
came--and I cared for you very, _very_ much indeed. That's all. (_Face
hidden._) You aren't angry, are you?

CAPT. G. Angry? Not in the least. (_Aside._) Good Lord, what have I
done to deserve this angel?

MRS. G. (_Aside._) And he never asked for the name! How funny men
are! But perhaps it's as well.

CAPT. G. That man will go to heaven because you once thought you cared
for him. 'Wonder if you'll ever drag me up there?

MRS. G. (_Firmly._) 'Shan't go if you don't.

CAPT. G. Thanks. I say, Pussy, I don't know much about your religious
beliefs. You were brought up to believe in a heaven and all that,
weren't you?

MRS. G. Yes. But it was a pincushion heaven, with hymn-books in all
the pews.

CAPT. G. (_Wagging his head with intense conviction._)   Never
mind. There is a _pukka_ heaven.

MRS. G. Where do you bring that message from, my prophet?

CAPT. G. Here! Because we care for each other. So it's all right.

MRS. G. (_As a troop of langurs crash through the branches._) So it's
all right. But Darwin says that we came from _those!_

CAPT. G. (_Placidly._) Ah! Darwin was never in love with an angel.
That settles it. Sstt, you brutes! Monkeys, indeed! You shouldn't read
those books.

MRS. G. (_Folding her hands._) If it pleases my Lord the King to issue
proclamation.

CAPT. G. Don't, dear one. There are no orders between us. Only I'd
_rather_ you didn't. They lead to nothing, and bother people's heads.

MRS. G. Like your first engagement.

CAPT.G. (_With an immense calm._) That was a necessary evil and led
to you. Are _you_ nothing?

MRS. G. Not so very much, am I?

CAPT. G. All this world and the next to me.

MRS. G. (_Very softly._) My boy of boys! Shall I tell _you_ something?

CAPT. G. Yes, if it's not dreadful--about other men.

MRS. G. It's about my own bad little self.

CAPT. G. Then it must be good. Go on, dear.

MRS. G. (_Slowly._) I don't know why I'm telling you, Pip; but if ever
you marry again--(_Interlude._) Take your hand from my mouth or I'll
_bite!_ In the future, then remember-- I don't know quite how to put it!

CAPT. G. (_Snorting indignantly._) Don't try. 'Marry again,' indeed!

MRS. G. I must. Listen, my husband. Never, never, _never_ tell your
wife anything that you do not wish her to remember and think over all
her life. Because a woman--yes, I _am_ a woman--_can't_ forget.

CAPT. G. By Jove, how do _you_ know that?

MRS. G. (_Confusedly._) I don't. I'm only guessing. I am--I was--a
silly little girl; but I feel that I know so much, oh, so very much
more than you, dearest. To begin with, I'm your wife.

CAPT. G. So I have been led to believe.

MRS. G. And I shall want to know every one of your secrets--to share
everything you know with you. (_Stares round desperately._)

CAPT. G. So you shall, dear, so you shall--but don't look like that.

MRS. G. For your own sake don't stop me, Phil. I shall never talk to
you in this way again. You must _not_ tell me! At least, not now. Later
on, when I'm an old matron it won't matter, but if you love me, be
very good to me now; for this part of my life I shall _never_ forget!
Have I made you understand?

CAPT. G. I think so, child. Have I said anything yet that you
disapprove of?

MRS. G. Will you be _very_ angry? That--that voice, and what you said
about the engagement--

CAPT. G. But you _asked_ to be told that, darling.

MRS. G. And _that's_ why you shouldn't have told me! You must be the
judge, and, oh, Pip, dearly as I love you, I shan't be able to help
you! I shall hinder you, and you must judge in spite of me!

CAPT. G. (_Meditatively._) We have a great many things to find out
together, God help us both--say so, Pussy--but we shall understand
each other better every day; and I think I'm beginning to see now. How
in the world did you come to know just the importance of giving me
just that lead?

MRS. G. I've told you that I _don't_ know. Only somehow it seemed that,
in all this new life, I was being guided for your sake as well as my
own.

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) Then Mafflin was right! They know, and we--we're
blind--all of us. (_Lightly._) 'Getting a little beyond our depth,
dear, aren't we? I'll remember, and, if I fail, let me be punished as
I deserve.

MRS. G. There shall be no punishment. We'll start into life together
from here--you and I--and no one else.

CAPT. G. And no one else. (_A pause._) Your eyelashes are all wet,
Sweet? Was there ever such a quaint little Absurdity?

MRS. G. Was there ever such nonsense talked before?

CAPT. G. (_Knocking the ashes out of his pipe._) 'Tisn't what we say,
it's what we don't say, that helps. And it's all the profoundest
philosophy. But no one would understand--even if it were put into a
book.

MRS. G. The idea! No--only we ourselves, or people like ourselves--if
there are any people like us.

CAPT. G. (_Magisterially._) All people, not like ourselves, are blind
idiots.

MRS. G. (_Wiping her eyes._) Do you think, then, that there are any
people as happy as we are?

CAPT. G. 'Must be--unless we've appropriated all the happiness in the
world.

MRS. G. (_Looking towards Simla._) Poor dears! Just fancy if we have!

CAPT. G. Then we'll hang on to the whole show, for it's a great deal
too jolly to lose--eh, wife o' mine?

MRS. G. O Pip! Pip! How much of you is a solemn, married man and how
much a horrid, slangy schoolboy?

CAPT. G. When you tell me how much of you was eighteen last birthday
and how much is as old as the Sphinx and twice as mysterious, perhaps
I'll attend to you. Lend me that banjo. The spirit moveth me to yowl
at the sunset.

MRS. G. Mind! It's not tuned. Ah! How that jars.

CAPT. G. (_Turning pegs._) It's amazingly difficult to keep a banjo
to proper pitch.

MRS. G. It's the same with all musical instruments. What shall it be?

CAPT. G. 'Vanity,' and let the hills hear. (_Sings through the first
and half of the second verse. Turning to_ MRS. G.) Now, chorus! Sing,
Pussy!

BOTH TOGETHER. (_Con brio, to the horror of the monkeys who are
settling for the night._)--

       'Vanity, all is Vanity,' said Wisdom, scorning me--
       I clasped my true Love's tender hand and answered
            frank and free--ee:--

       'If this be Vanity who'd be wise?
       If this be Vanity who'd be wise?
       If this be Vanity who'd be wi--ise?
       (_Crescendo._) Vanity let it be!'

MRS. G. (_Defiantly to the gray of the evening sky._) 'Vanity let
it be!'

ECHO. (_From the Fagoo spur._) Let it be!




FATIMA

And you may go into every room of the house and see everything that
is there, but into the Blue Room you must _not_ go.
    --_The Story of Blue Beard._

SCENE.--_The_ GADSBYS' _bungalow in the Plains. Time,_ 11 A. M. _on
a Sunday morning._ CAPTAIN GADSBY, _in his shirt-sleeves, is bending
over a complete set of Hussar's equipment, from saddle to
picketing-rope, which is neatly spread over the floor of his study.
He is smoking an unclean briar, and his forehead is puckered with
thought._

CAPT. G. (_To himself, fingering a headstall._) Jack's an ass. There's
enough brass on this to load a mule--and, if the Americans know anything
about anything, it can be cut down to a bit only. 'Don't want the
watering-bridle, either. Humbug!--Half a dozen sets of chains and
pulleys for one horse! Rot! (_Scratching his head._) Now, let's consider
it all over from the beginning. By Jove, I've forgotten the scale of
weights! Ne'er mind. 'Keep the bit only, and eliminate every boss from
the crupper to breastplate. No breastplate at all. Simple leather strap
across the breast--like the Russians. Hi! Jack never thought of _that!_

MRS. G. (_Entering hastily, her hand bound in a cloth._) Oh, Pip,
I've scalded my hand over that horrid, horrid Tiparee jam!

CAPT. G. (_Absently._) Eh! Wha-at?

MRS. G. (_With round-eyed reproach._) I've scalded it _aw_-fully!
Aren't you sorry? And I _did_ so want that jam to jam properly.

CAPT. G. Poor little woman! Let me kiss the place and make it well.
(_Unrolling bandage._) You small sinner! Where's that scald? I can't
see it.

MRS. G. On the top of the little finger. There!--It's a most 'normous
big burn!

CAPT. G. (_Kissing little finger._) Baby! Let Hyder look after the
jam. You know I don't care for sweets.

MRS. G. In-deed?--Pip!

CAPT. G. Not of that kind, anyhow. And now run along, Minnie, and leave
me to my own base devices. I'm busy.

MRS. G. (_Calmly settling herself in long chair._) So I see. What a
mess you're making! Why have you brought all that smelly leather stuff
into the house?

CAPT. G. To play with. Do you mind, dear?

MRS. G. Let _me_ play too. I'd like it.

CAPT. G. I'm afraid you wouldn't, Pussy--Don't you think that jam will
burn, or whatever it is that jam does when it's not looked after by
a clever little housekeeper?

MRS. G. I thought you said Hyder could attend to it. I left him in the
veranda, stirring--when I hurt myself so.

CAPT. G. (_His eye returning to the equipment._) Po-oor little
woman!--Three pounds four and seven is three eleven, and that can be
cut down to two eight, with just a _lee_-tle care, without weakening
anything. Farriery is all rot in incompetent hands. What's the use of
a shoe-case when a man's scouting? He can't stick it on with a
lick--like a stamp--the shoe! Skittles!

MRS. G. What's skittles? Pah! What _is_ this leather cleaned with?

CAPT. G. Cream and champagne and-- Look here, dear, do you really want
to talk to me about anything important?

MRS. G. No. I've done my accounts, and I thought I'd like to see what
you're doing.

CAPT. G. Well, love, now you've seen and--Would you mind?--That is
to say--Minnie, I really _am_ busy.

MRS. G. You want me to go?

CAPT. G. Yes, dear, for a little while. This tobacco will hang in your
dress, and saddlery doesn't interest you.

MRS. G. Everything you do interests me, Pip.

CAPT. G. Yes, I know, I know, dear. I'll tell you all about it some
day when I've put a head on this thing. In the meantime--

MRS. G. I'm to be turned out of the room like a troublesome child?

CAPT. G. No-o. I don't mean that exactly. But, you see, I shall be
tramping up and down, shifting these things to and fro, and I shall
be in your way. Don't you think so?

MRS. G. Can't I lift them about? Let me try. (_Reaches forward to
trooper's saddle._)

CAPT. G. Good gracious, child, don't touch it. You'll hurt yourself.
(_Picking up saddle._) Little girls aren't expected to handle _numdahs._
Now, where would you like it put? (_Holds saddle above his head._)

MRS. G. (_A break in her voice._) Nowhere. Pip, how good you are--and
how strong! Oh, what's that ugly red streak inside your arm?

CAPT. G. (_Lowering saddle quickly._) Nothing. It's a mark of sorts.
(_Aside._) And Jack's coming to tiffin with _his_ notions all cut and
dried!

MRS. G. I know it's a mark, but I've never seen it before. It runs all
up the arm. What is it?

CAPT. G. A cut--if you want to know.

MRS. G. Want to know! Of course I do! I can't have my husband cut to
pieces in this way. How did it come? Was it an accident? Tell me, Pip.

CAPT. G. (_Grimly._) No. 'Twasn't an accident. I got it--from a man--in
Afghanistan.

MRS. G. In action? Oh, Pip, and you _never_ told me!

CAPT. G. I'd forgotten all about it.

MRS. G. Hold up your arm! What a horrid, ugly scar! Are you sure it
doesn't hurt now? How did the man give it you?

CAPT. G. (_Desperately looking at his watch._) With a knife. I came
down--old Van Loo did, that's to say--and fell on my leg, so I couldn't
run. And then this man came up and began chopping at me as I sprawled.

MRS. G. Oh, don't, don't! That's enough!--Well, what happened?

CAPT. G. I couldn't get to my holster, and Mafflin came round the
corner and stopped the performance.

MRS. G. How? He's such a lazy man, I don't believe he did.

CAPT. G. Don't you? I don't think the man had much doubt about it.
Jack cut his head off.

MRS. G. Cut--his--head--off! 'With one blow,' as they say in the books?

CAPT. G. I'm not sure. I was too interested in myself to know much
about it. Anyhow, the head was off, and Jack was punching old Van Loo
in the ribs to make him get up. Now you know all about it, dear, and
now--

MRS. G. You want me to go, of course. You never told me about this,
though I've been married to you for _ever_ so long; and you never
_would_ have told me if I hadn't found out; and you never _do_ tell
me anything about yourself, or what you do, or what you take an interest
in.

CAPT. G. Darling, I'm always with you, aren't I?

MRS. G. Always in my pocket, you were going to say. I know you are;
but you are always _thinking_ away from me.

CAPT. G. (_Trying to hide a smile._) Am I? I wasn't aware of it. I'm
awf'ly sorry.

MRS. G. (_Piteously._) Oh, don't make fun of me! Pip, you know what
I mean. When you are reading one of those things about Cavalry, by
that idiotic Prince--why doesn't he _be_ a Prince instead of a
stable-boy?

CAPT. G. Prince Kraft a stable-boy--Oh, my Aunt! Never mind, dear.
You were going to say?

MRS. G. It doesn't matter; you don't care for what I say. Only--only
you get up and walk about the room, staring in front of you, and then
Mafflin comes in to dinner, and after I'm in the drawing-room I can
hear you and him talking, and talking, and talking, about things I
can't understand, and--oh, I get _so_ tired and feel _so_ lonely!--I
don't want to complain and be a trouble, Pip; but I do--indeed I do!

CAPT. G. My poor darling! I never thought of that. Why don't you ask
some nice people in to dinner?

MRS. G. Nice people! Where am I to find them? Horrid frumps! And if I
_did_, I shouldn't be amused. You know I only want _you._

CAPT. G. And you have me surely, Sweetheart?

MRS. G. I have not! Pip, why don't you take me into your life?

CAPT. G. More than I do? That would be difficult, dear.

MRS. G. Yes, I suppose it would--to you. I'm no help to you--no
companion to you; and you like to have it so.

CAPT. G. Aren't you a little unreasonable, Pussy?

MRS. G. (_Stamping her foot._) I'm the most reasonable woman in the
world--when I'm treated properly.

CAPT. G. And since when have I been treating you improperly?

MRS. G. Always--and since the beginning. You _know_ you have.

CAPT. G. I don't; but I'm willing to be convinced.

MRS. G. (_Pointing to saddlery._) There!

CAPT. G. How do you mean?

MRS. G. What does all _that_ mean? Why am I not to be told? Is it so
precious?

CAPT. G. I forget its exact Government value just at present. It means
that it is a great deal too heavy.

MRS. G. Then why do you touch it?

CAPT. G. To make it lighter. See here, little love, I've one notion
and Jack has another, but we are both agreed that all this equipment
is about thirty pounds too heavy. The thing is how to cut it down
without weakening any part of it, and, at the same time, allowing the
trooper to carry everything he wants for his own comfort--socks and
shirts and things of that kind.

MRS. G. Why doesn't he pack them in a little trunk?

CAPT. G. (_Kissing her._) Oh, you darling! Pack them in a little trunk,
indeed! Hussars don't carry trunks, and it's a most important thing
to make the horse do all the carrying.

MRS. G. But why need _you_ bother about it? You're not a trooper.

CAPT. G. No; but I command a few score of him; and equipment is nearly
everything in these days.

MRS. G. More than _me?_

CAPT. G. Stupid! Of course not; but it's a matter that I'm tremendously
interested in, because if I or Jack, or I and Jack, work out some sort
of lighter saddlery and all that, it's possible that we may get it
adopted.

MRS. G. How?

CAPT. G. Sanctioned at Home, where they will make a sealed pattern--a
pattern that all the saddlers must copy--and so it will be used by all
the regiments.

MRS. G. And that interests you?

CAPT. G. It's part of my profession, y'know, and my profession is a
good deal to me. Everything in a soldier's equipment is important, and
if we can improve that equipment, so much the better for the soldiers
and for us.

MRS.G. Who's 'us'?

CAPT. G. Jack and I; only Jack's notions are too radical. What's that
big sigh for, Minnie?

MRS. G. Oh, nothing--and you've kept all this a secret from me! Why?

CAPT. G. Not a secret, exactly, dear. I didn't say anything about it
to you because I didn't think it would amuse you.

MRS. G. And am I only made to be amused?

CAPT. G. No, of course. I merely mean that it couldn't interest you.

MRS. G. It's _your_ work and--and if you'd let me, I'd count all these
things up. If they are too heavy, you know by how much they are too
heavy, and you must have a list of things made out to your scale of
lightness, and--

CAPT. G. I have got both scales somewhere in my head; but it's hard
to tell how light you can make a headstall, for instance, until you've
actually had a model made.

MRS. G. But if you read out the list, I could copy it down, and pin
it up there just above your table. Wouldn't that do?

CAPT. G. It would be awf'ly nice, dear, but it would be giving you
trouble for nothing. I can't work that way. I go by rule of thumb. I
know the present scale of weights, and the other one--the one that I'm
trying to work to--will shift and vary so much that I couldn't be
certain, even if I wrote it down.

MRS. G. I'm _so_ sorry. I thought I might help. Is there anything else
that I could be of use in?

CAPT. G. (_Looking round the room._) I can't think of anything. You're
_always_ helping me, you know.

MRS. G. Am I? How?

CAPT. G. You are you of course, and as long as you're near me--I can't
explain exactly, but it's in the air.

MRS. G. And that's why you wanted to send me away?

CAPT. G. That's only when I'm trying to do work--grubby work like this.

MRS. G. Mafflin's better, then, isn't he?

CAPT. G. (_Rashly._) Of course he is. Jack and I have been thinking
along the same groove for two or three years about this equipment.
It's our hobby, and it may really be useful some day.

MRS. G. (_After a pause._) And that's all that you have away from me?

CAPT. G. It isn't very far away from you now. Take care the oil on
that bit doesn't come off on your dress.

MRS. G. I wish--I wish so much that I could really help you. I believe
I could--if I left the room. But that's not what I mean.

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) Give me patience! I wish she would go. (_Aloud._)
I assure you you can't do anything for me, Minnie, and I must really
settle down to this. Where's my pouch?

MRS. G. (_Crossing to writing-table._) Here you are, Bear. What a mess
you keep your table in!

CAPT. G. Don't touch it. There's a method in my madness, though you
mightn't think of it.

MRS. G. (_At table._) I want to look-- Do you keep accounts, Pip?

CAPT. G. (_Bending over saddlery._) Of a sort. Are you rummaging among
the Troop papers? Be careful.

MRS. G. Why? I shan't disturb anything. Good gracious! I had no idea
that you had anything to do with so many sick horses.

CAPT. G. 'Wish I hadn't, but they insist on falling sick. Minnie, if
I were you I really should not investigate those papers. You may come
across something that you won't like.

MRS. G. Why will you always treat me like a child? I know I'm not
displacing the horrid things.

CAPT. G. (_Resignedly._) Very well, then. Don't blame me if anything
happens. Play with the table and let me go on with the saddlery.
(_Slipping hand into trousers-pocket._) Oh, the deuce!

MRS. G. (_Her back to_ G.) What's that for?

CAPT. G. Nothing. (_Aside._) There's not much in it, but I wish I'd
torn it up.

MRS. G. (_Turning over contents of table._) I know you'll hate me for
this; but I do want to see what your work is like. (_A pause._) Pip,
what are 'farcy-buds'?

CAPT. G. Hah! Would you really like to know? They aren't pretty things.

MRS. G. This _Journal of Veterinary Science_ says they are of 'absorbing
interest.' Tell me.

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) It may turn her attention.

       _Gives a long and designedly loathsome account of
       glanders and farcy_

MRS. G. Oh, that's enough. Don't go on!

CAPT. G. But you wanted to know--Then these things suppurate and
matterate and spread--

MRS. G. Pip, you're making me sick! You're a horrid, disgusting
schoolboy.

CAPT. G. (_On his knees among the bridles._) You asked to be told.
It's not my fault if you worry me into talking about horrors.

MRS. G. Why didn't you say--No?

CAPT. G. Good Heavens, child! Have you come in here simply to bully me?

MRS. G. I bully _you?_ How could I! You're so strong. (_Hysterically._)
Strong enough to pick me up and put me outside the door and leave me
there to cry. Aren't you?

CAPT. G. It seems to me that you're an irrational little baby. Are you
quite well?

MRS. G. Do I look ill? (_Returning to table._) Who is your lady friend
with the big gray envelope and the fat monogram outside?

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) Then it wasn't locked up, confound it. (_Aloud._)
'God made her, therefore let her pass for a woman.' You remember what
farcy-buds are like?

MRS. G. (_Showing envelope._) This has nothing to do with _them._ I'm
going to open it. May I?

CAPT. G. Certainly, if you want to. I'd sooner you didn't, though. I
don't ask to look at your letters to the Deercourt girl.

MRS. G. You'd _better_ not, Sir! (_Takes letter from envelope._) Now,
may I look? If you say no, I shall cry.

CAPT. G. You've never cried in my knowledge of you, and I don't believe
you could.

MRS. G. I feel very like it to-day, Pip. Don't be hard on me. (_Reads
letter._) It begins in the middle, without any 'Dear Captain Gadsby,'
or anything. How funny!

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) No, it's not Dear Captain Gadsby, or anything,
now. How funny!

MRS. G. What a strange letter! (_Reads._) 'And so the moth has come
too near the candle at last, and has been singed into--shall I say
Respectability? I congratulate him, and hope he will be as happy as
he deserves to be.' What does that mean? Is she congratulating you
about our marriage?

CAPT. G. Yes, I suppose so.

MRS. G. (_Still reading letter._) She seems to be a particular friend
of yours.

CAPT. G. Yes. She was an excellent matron of sorts--a Mrs.
Herriott--wife of a Colonel Herriott. I used to know some of her people
at Home long ago--before I came out.

MRS. G. Some Colonels' wives are young--as young as me. I knew one who
was younger.

CAPT. G. Then it couldn't have been Mrs. Herriott. She was old enough
to have been your mother, dear.

MRS. G. I remember now. Mrs. Scargill was talking about her at the
Duffins' tennis, before you came for me, on Tuesday. Captain Mafflin
said she was a 'dear old woman.' Do you know, I think Mafflin is a
very clumsy man with his feet.

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) Good old Jack! (_Aloud._) Why, dear?

MRS. G. He had put his cup down on the ground then, and he literally
stepped into it. Some of the tea spirted over my dress--the gray one.
I meant to tell you about it before.

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) There are the makings of a strategist about Jack,
though his methods are coarse. (_Aloud._) You'd better get a new dress,
then. (_Aside._) Let us pray that that will turn her.

MRS. G. Oh, it isn't stained in the least. I only thought that I'd
tell you. (_Returning to letter._) _What_ an extraordinary person!
(_Reads._) 'But need I remind you that you have taken upon yourself
a charge of wardship'--what in the world is a charge of
wardship?--'which, as you yourself know, may end in Consequences--'

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) It's safest to let 'em see everything as they come
across it; but 'seems to me that there are exceptions to the rule.
(_Aloud._) I told you that there was nothing to be gained from
rearranging my table.

MRS. G. (_Absently._) What _does_ the woman mean? She goes on talking
about Consequences--'almost inevitable Consequences' with a capital
C--for half a page. (_Flushing scarlet._) Oh, good gracious! How
abominable!

CAPT. G. (_Promptly._) Do you think so? Doesn't it show a sort of
motherly interest in us? (_Aside._) Thank Heaven, Harry always wrapped
her meaning up safely! (_Aloud._) Is it absolutely necessary to go on
with the letter, darling?

MRS. G. It's impertinent--it's simply horrid. What _right_ has this
woman to write in this way to you? She oughtn't to.

CAPT. G. When you write to the Deercourt girl, I notice that you
generally fill three or four sheets. Can't you let an old woman babble
on paper once in a way? She means well.

MRS. G. I don't care. She shouldn't write, and if she did, you ought
to have shown me her letter.

CAPT. G. Can't you understand why I kept it to myself, or must I explain
at length--as I explained the farcy-buds?

MRS. G. (_Furiously._) Pip, I _hate_ you! This is as bad as those
idiotic saddle-bags on the floor. Never mind whether it would please
me or not, you ought to have given it to me to read.

CAPT. G. It comes to the same thing. You took it yourself.

MRS. G. Yes, but if I hadn't taken it, you wouldn't have said a word.
I think this Harriet Herriott--it's like a name in a book--is an
interfering old Thing.

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) So long as you thoroughly understand that she _is_
old, I don't much care what you think. (_Aloud._) Very good, dear.
Would you like to write and tell her so? She's seven thousand miles
away.

MRS. G. I don't want to have anything to do with her, but you ought
to have told me. (_Turning to last page of letter._) And she patronises
_me_, too. _I_'ve never seen her! (_Reads._) 'I do not know how the
world stands with you; in all human probability I shall never know;
but whatever I may have said before, I pray for _her_ sake more than
for yours that all may be well. I have learnt what misery means, and
I dare not wish that any one dear to you should share my knowledge.'

CAPT. G. Good God! Can't you leave that letter alone, or, at least,
can't you refrain from reading it aloud? I've been through it once.
Put it back on the desk. Do you hear me?

MRS. G. (_Irresolutely._) I sh--shan't! (_Looks at_ G'.s _eyes._) Oh,
Pip, _please!_ I didn't mean to make you angry--'Deed, I didn't. Pip,
I'm so sorry. I know I've wasted your time----

CAPT. G. (_Grimly._) You have. Now, will you be good enough to go--if
there is nothing more in my room that you are anxious to pry into?

MRS. G. (_Putting out her hands._) Oh, Pip, don't look at me like that!
I've never seen you look like that before and it hu-urts me! I'm sorry.
I oughtn't to have been here at all, and--and--and--(_sobbing_). Oh,
be good to me! Be good to me! There's only you--anywhere!

     _Breaks down in long chair, hiding face in cushions._

CAPT. G. (_Aside._) She doesn't know how she flicked me on the raw.
(_Aloud, bending over chair._) I didn't mean to be harsh, dear--I
didn't really. You can stay here as long as you please, and do what
you please. Don't cry like that. You'll make yourself sick. (_Aside._)
What on earth has come over her? (_Aloud._) Darling, what's the matter
with you?

MRS. G. (_Her face still hidden._) Let me go--let me go to my own room.
Only--only say you aren't angry with me.

CAPT. G. Angry with _you_, love! Of course not. I was angry with myself.
I'd lost my temper over the saddlery--Don't hide your face, Pussy. I
want to kiss it.

       _Bends lower_, MRS. G. _slides right arm round his
       neck. Several interludes and much sobbing._

MRS. G. (_In a whisper._) I didn't mean about the jam when I came in
to tell you----

CAPT. G. Bother the jam and the equipment! (_Interlude._)

MRS. G. (_Still more faintly._) My finger wasn't scalded at _all_.
I--I wanted to speak to you about--about--something else, and--I didn't
know how.

CAPT. G. Speak away, then. (_Looking into her eyes._) Eh! Wha--at?
Minnie! Here, don't go away! You don't mean?

MRS. G. (_Hysterically, backing to portiere and hiding her face in its
folds._) The--the Almost Inevitable Consequences! (_Flits though
portiere as_ G. _attempts to catch her, and bolts herself in her own
room._)

CAPT. G. (_His arms full of portiere._) Oh! (_Sitting down heavily in
chair._) I'm a brute--a pig--a bully, and a blackguard. My poor, poor
little darling! 'Made to be amused only--?




THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW

Knowing Good and Evil.

SCENE.--_The_ GADSBYS' _bungalow in the Plains, in June. Punkah-coolies
asleep in veranda where_ CAPTAIN GADSBY _is walking up and down._
DOCTOR'S _trap in porch._ JUNIOR CHAPLAIN _drifting generally and
uneasily through the house. Time,_ 3.40 A. M. _Heat 94 degrees in
veranda._

DOCTOR. (_Coming into veranda and touching_ G. _on the shoulder._) You
had better go in and see her now.

CAPT. G. (_The colour of good cigar-ash._) Eh, wha-at? Oh, yes, of
course. What did you say?

DOCTOR. (_Syllable by syllable._)
Go--in--to--the--room--and--see--her. She wants to speak to you.
(_Aside, testily._) I shall have _him_ on my hands next.

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (_In half-lighted dining-room._) Isn't there any--?

DOCTOR. (_Savagely._) Hsh, you little fool!

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. Let me do my work. Gadsby, stop a minute! (_Edges
after_ G.)

DOCTOR. Wait till she sends for you at least--_at least_. Man alive,
he'll kill you if you go in there! What are you bothering him for?

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (_Coming into veranda._) I've given him a stiff
brandy-peg. He wants it. You've forgotten him for the last ten hours
and--forgotten yourself too.

       G. _enters bedroom, which is lit by one night-lamp.
       Ayah on the floor pretending to be asleep._

VOICE. (_From the bed._) All down the street--such_ bonfires! _Ayah_,
go and put them out! (_Appealingly._) How can I sleep with an
installation of the C.I.E. in my room? No--not C.I.E. Something else.
_What_ was it?

CAPT. G. (_Trying to control his voice._) Minnie, I'm here. (_Bending
over bed._) Don't you know me, Minnie? It's me--it's Phil--it's your
husband.

VOICE. (_Mechanically._) It's me--it's Phil--it's your husband.

CAPT. G. She doesn't know me!--It's your own husband, darling,

VOICE. Your own husband, darling.

AYAH. (_With an inspiration._) _Memsahib_ understanding all _I_ saying.

CAPT. G. Make her understand me then--quick!

AYAH. (_Hand on_ MRS. G's _forehead._) _Memsahib!_ Captain Sahib here.

VOICE. _Salma do._ (_Fretfully._) I know I'm not fit to be seen.

AYAH. (_Aside to_ G.) Say _'marneen'_ same as breakfash.

CAPT. G. Good-morning, little woman. How are we to-day?

  VOICE. That's Phil. Poor old Phil. (_Viciously._)
  Phil, you fool, I can't see you. Come nearer.

CAPT. G. Minnie! Minnie! It's me--you know me?

VOICE. (_Mockingly._) Of course I do. Who does not know the man who
was so cruel to his wife--almost the only one he ever had?

CAPT. G. Yes, dear. Yes--of course, of course. But won't you speak to
him? He wants to speak to you so much.

VOICE. They'd never let him in. The Doctor would give _darwaza bund_
even if he were in the house. He'll never come. (_Despairingly._) O
Judas! Judas! Judas!

CAPT. G. (_Putting out his arms._) They have let him in, and he always
was in the house. Oh, my love--don't you know me?

VOICE. (_In a half chant._) 'And it came to pass at the eleventh hour
that this poor soul repented.' It knocked at the gates, but they were
shut--tight as a plaster--a great, burning plaster. They had pasted
our marriage certificate all across the door, and it was made of red-hot
iron--people really ought to be more careful, you know.

CAPT. G. What _am_ I to do? (_Takes her in his arms._) Minnie! speak
to me--to Phil.

VOICE. What shall I say? Oh, tell me what to say before it's too late!
They are all going away and I can't say anything.

CAPT. G. Say you know me! Only say you know me!

DOCTOR. (_Who has entered quietly._) For pity's sake don't take it too
much to heart, Gadsby. It's this way sometimes. They won't recognise.
They say all sorts of queer things--don't you _see?_

CAPT. G. All right! All right! Go away now, she'll recognise me; you're
bothering her. She _must_--mustn't she?

DOCTOR. She will before-- Have I your leave to try--?

CAPT. G. Anything you please, so long as she'll know me. It's only a
question of--hours, isn't it?

DOCTOR. (_Professionally._) While there's life there's hope, y'know.
But don't build on it.

CAPT. G. I don't. Pull her together if it's possible. (_Aside._) What
have I done to deserve this?

DOCTOR. (_Bending over bed._) Now, Mrs. Gadsby! We shall be all right
to-morrow. You _must_ take it, or I shan't let Phil see you. It isn't
nasty, is it?

VOICE. Medicines! _Always_ more medicines! Can't you leave me alone?

CAPT. G. Oh, leave her in peace, Doc!

DOCTOR. (_Stepping back,--aside._) May I be forgiven if I've done
wrong. (_Aloud._) In a few minutes she ought to be sensible; but I
daren't tell you to look for anything. It's only--

CAPT. G. What? Go _on_, man.

DOCTOR. (_In a whisper._) Forcing the last rally.

CAPT. G. Then leave us alone.

DOCTOR. Don't mind what she says at first, if you can. They--they--they
turn against those they love most sometimes in this.--It's hard, but--

CAPT. G. Am I her husband or are you? Leave us alone for what time we
have together.

VOICE. (_Confidentially._) And we were engaged _quite_ suddenly, Emma.
I assure you that I never thought of it for a moment; but, oh, my
little Me!--I don't know _what_ I should have done if he _hadn't_
proposed.

CAPT. G. She thinks of that Deercourt girl before she thinks of me.
(_Aloud._) Minnie!

VOICE. Not from the shops, Mummy dear. You can get the real leaves
from Kaintu, and (_laughing weakly_) never mind about the blossoms--Dead
white silk is only fit for widows, and I _won't_ wear it. It's as bad
as a winding sheet. (_A long pause._)

CAPT. G. I never asked a favour yet. If there is anybody to listen to
me, let her know me--even if I die too!

VOICE. (_Very faintly._) Pip, Pip dear.

CAPT. G. I'm here, darling.

VOICE. What has happened? They've been bothering me so with medicines
and things, and they wouldn't let you come and see me. I was never ill
before. Am I ill now?

CAPT. G. You--you aren't quite well.

VOICE. How funny! Have I been ill long?

CAPT. G. Some days; but you'll be all right in a little time.

VOICE. Do you think so, Pip? I don't feel well and--Oh! what _have_
they done to my hair?

CAPT. G. I d-d-don't know.

VOICE. They've cut it off. What a shame!

CAPT. G. It must have been to make your head cooler.

VOICE. 'Just like a boy's wig. Don't I look horrid?

CAPT. G. Never looked prettier in your life, dear.  (_Aside._) How
am I to ask her to say good-bye?

VOICE. I don't _feel_ pretty. I feel very ill. My heart won't work.
It's nearly dead inside me, and there's a funny feeling in my eyes.
Everything seems the same distance--you and the almirah and the
table--inside my eyes or miles away. What does it mean, Pip?

CAPT. G. You're a little feverish, Sweetheart--very feverish. (_Breaking
down._) My love! my love! How can I let you go?

VOICE. I thought so. Why didn't you tell me that at first?

CAPT. G. What?

VOICE. That I am going to--die.

CAPT. G. But you aren't! You shan't.

AYAH _to punkah-coolie_. (_Stepping into veranda after a glance at the
bed._) _Punkah chor do!_ (Stop pulling the punkah.)

VOICE. It's hard, Pip. So very, _very_ hard after one year--just one
year. (_Wailing._) And I'm only twenty. Most girls aren't even married
at twenty. Can't they do _anything_ to help me? I don't _want_ to die.

CAPT. G. Hush, dear. You won't.

VOICE. What's the use of talking? _Help_ me! You've never failed me
yet. Oh, Phil, help me to keep alive. (_Feverishly._) I don't believe
you wish me to live. You weren't a bit sorry when that horrid Baby
thing died. I wish I'd killed it!

CAPT. G. (_Drawing his hand across his forehead._) It's more than a
man's meant to bear--it's not right. (_Aloud._) Minnie, love, I'd die
for you if it would help.

VOICE. No more death. There's enough already. Pip, don't _you_ die too.

CAPT. G. I wish I dared.

VOICE. It says: 'Till Death do us part.' Nothing after that--and so
it would be no use. It stops at the dying. _Why_ does it stop there?
Only such a very short life, too. Pip, I'm sorry we married.

CAPT. G. No! Anything but that, Min!

VOICE. Because you'll forget and I'll forget. Oh, Pip, _don't_ forget!
I always loved you, though I was cross sometimes. If I ever did anything
that you didn't like, say you forgive me now.

CAPT. G. You never did, darling. On my soul and honour you never did.
I haven't a thing to forgive you.

VOICE. I sulked for a whole week about those petunias. (_With a laugh._)
What a little wretch I was, and how grieved you were! Forgive me that,
Pip.

CAPT. G. There's nothing to forgive. It was my fault. They _were_ too
near the drive. For God's sake _don't_ talk so, Minnie! There's such
a lot to say and so little time to say it in.

VOICE. Say that you'll always love me--until the end.

CAPT. G. Until the end. (_Carried away._) It's a lie. It _must_ be,
because we've loved each other. This isn't the end.

VOICE. (_Relapsing into semi-delirium._) _My_ Church-service has an
ivory-cross on the back, and _it_ says so, so it must be true. 'Till
Death do us part.'--But that's a lie. (_With a parody of_ G.'s
_manner._) A damned lie! (_Recklessly._) Yes, I can swear as well as
Trooper Pip. I can't make my head think, though. That's because they
cut off my hair. How _can_ one think with one's head all fuzzy?
(_Pleadingly._) Hold me, Pip! Keep me with you always and always.
(_Relapsing._) But if you marry the Thorniss girl when I'm dead, I'll
come back and howl under our bedroom window all night. Oh, bother!
You'll think I'm a jackal. Pip, what time is it?

CAPT. G. I--I--I can't help it, dear.

VOICE. How funny! I couldn't cry now to save my life. (G. _shivers._)
_I_ want to sing.

CAPT. G. Won't it tire you? Better not, perhaps.

VOICE. Why? I _won't_ be bothered about. (_Begins in a hoarse
quaver_):--

       'Minnie bakes oaten cake, Minnie brews ale,
       All because her Johnnie's coming home from the sea.
            (That's parade, Pip.)
       And she grows red as rose, who was so pale;
       And "Are you sure the church-clock goes?" says she.'

(_Pettishly._) I knew I couldn't take the last note. How do the bass
chords run? (_Puts out her hands and begins playing piano on the
sheet._)

CAPT. G. (_Catching up hands._) Ahh! Don't do that, Pussy, if you love
me.

VOICE. Love you? Of course I do. Who else should it be? (_A pause._)

VOICE. (_Very clearly._) Pip, I'm going now. Something's choking me
cruelly. (_Indistinctly._) Into the dark--without you, my heart.--But
it's a lie, dear--we mustn't believe it.--For ever and ever, living
or dead. Don't let me go, my husband--hold me tight.--They
can't--whatever happens. (_A cough._) Pip--_my_ Pip! Not for
always--and--so--soon! (_Voice ceases._)

       _Pause of ten minutes._ G. _buries his face in the side
       of the bed while ayah bends over bed from opposite
       side and feels_ MRS. G.'s _breast and forehead._

CAPT. G. (_Rising._) _Doctor Sahib ko salaam do._

AYAH. (_Still by bedside, with a shriek._) Ai! Ai! _Tuta---phuta!_ My
_Memsahib!_ Not getting--not have got!--_Pusseena agya!_ (The sweat
has come.) (_Fiercely to _G.) TUM _jao Doctor Sahib ko jaldi!_ (_You_
go to the doctor.) _Oh,_ my _Memsahib!_

DOCTOR. (_Entering hastily._) Come away, Gadsby. (_Bends over bed._)
Eh! The Dev--What inspired you to stop the punkah? Get out, man--go
away--wait outside! _Go!_ Here, Ayah! (_Over his shoulder to_ G.) Mind,
I promise nothing.

     _The dawn breaks as_ G. _stumbles into the garden._

CAPT. M. (_Reining up at the gate on his way to parade and very
soberly._) Old man, how goes?

CAPT. G. (_Dazed._) I don't quite know. Stay a bit. Have a drink or
something. Don't run away. You're just getting amusing. Ha! Ha!

CAPT. M. (_Aside._) What _am_ I let in for? Gaddy has aged ten years
in the night.

CAPT. G. (_Slowly, fingering charger's headstall._) Your curb's too
loose.

CAPT. M. So it is. Put it straight, will you? (_Aside._) I shall be
late for parade. Poor Gaddy.

       CAPT. G. _links and unlinks curb-chain aimlessly,
       and finally stands staring towards the veranda.
       The day brightens._

DOCTOR. (_Knocked out of professional gravity, tramping across
flower-beds and shaking_ G.'s _hands._) It's--it's--it's!--Gadsby,
there's a fair chance--a _dashed_ fair chance! The flicker, y'know.
The sweat, y'know! I _saw_ how it would be. The punkah, y'know. Deuced
clever woman that Ayah of yours. Stopped the punkah just at the right
time. A _dashed_ good chance! No--you don't go in. We'll pull her
through yet I promise on my reputation--under Providence. Send a man
with this note to Bingle. Two heads better than one. 'Specially the
Ayah! _We'll_ pull her round. (_Retreats hastily to house._)

CAPT. G. (_His head on neck of_ M.'s _charger._) _Jack!_ I
bub--bub--believe, I'm going to make a bub--bub--bloody exhibitiod of
byself.

CAPT. M. (_Sniffing openly and feeling in his left cuff._) I
b-b--believe, I'b doing it already. Old bad, what _cad_ I say? I'b as
pleased as--Cod _dab_ you, Gaddy! You're one big idiot and I'b adother.
(_Pulling himself together._) Sit tight! Here comes the Devil-dodger.

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (_Who is not in the Doctor's confidence._) We--we
are only men in these things, Gadsby. I know that I can say nothing
now to help--

CAPT. M. (_Jealously._) Then don't say it! Leave him alone. It's not
bad enough to croak over. Here, Gaddy, take the _chit_ to Bingle and
ride hell-for-leather. It'll do you good. I can't go.

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. Do him good! (_Smiling._) Give me the _chit_ and I'll
drive. Let him lie down. Your horse is blocking my cart--_please!_

CAPT. M. (_Slowly without reining back._) I beg your pardon--I'll
apologise. On paper if you like.

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (_Flicking_ M.'s _charger._) That'll do, thanks. Turn
in, Gadsby, and I'll bring Bingle back--ahem--'hell-for-leather.'

CAPT. M. (_Solus._) It would have served me right if he'd cut me across
the face. He can drive too. I shouldn't care to go that pace in a
bamboo cart. What a faith he must have in his Maker--of harness! Come
_hup_, you brute! (_Gallops off to parade, blowing his nose, as the
sun rises._)

(INTERVAL OF FIVE WEEKS.)

MRS. G. (_Very white and pinched, in morning wrapper at breakfast
table._) How big and strange the room looks, and oh how glad I am to
see it again! What dust, though! I must talk to the servants. Sugar,
Pip? I've almost forgotten. (_Seriously._) Wasn't I very ill?

CAPT. G. Iller than I liked. (_Tenderly._) Oh, you bad little Pussy,
what a start you gave me!

MRS. G. I'll never do it again.

CAPT. G. You'd better not. And now get those poor pale cheeks pink
again, or I shall be angry. Don't try to lift the urn. You'll upset
it. Wait. (_Comes round to head of table and lifts urn._)

MRS. G. (_Quickly._) _Khitmatgar, bowarchi-khana see kettly lao_.
Butler, get a kettle from the cook-house. (_Drawing down_ G.'s _face
to her own._) Pip dear, _I_ remember.

CAPT. G. What?

MRS. G. That last terrible night.

CAPT. G. Then just you forget all about it.

MRS. G. (_Softly, her eyes filling._) Never. It has brought us _very_
close together, my husband. There! (_Interlude._) I'm going to give
Junda a _saree._

CAPT. G. I gave her fifty dibs.

MRS. G. So she told me. It was a 'normous reward. Was I worth it?
(_Several interludes._) Don't! Here's the _khitmatgar_.--Two lumps or
one, Sir?




THE SWELLING OF JORDAN

If thou hast run with the footmen and they have wearied thee, then how
canst thou contend with horses? And if in the land of peace wherein
thou trustedst they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the swelling
of Jordan?

SCENE.--_The_ GADSEYS' _bungalow in the Plains, on a January morning._
MRS. G. _arguing with bearer in back veranda._

                                   CAPT. M. _rides up._

CAPT. M. 'Mornin', Mrs. Gadsby. How's the Infant Phenomenon and the
Proud Proprietor?

MRS. G. You'll find them in the front veranda; go through the house.
I'm Martha just now.

CAPT. M. 'Cumbered about with cares of _khitmatgars?_ I fly.

       _Passes into front veranda, where_ GADSBY _is watching_
       GADSBY JUNIOR, _aged ten months, crawling about the
       matting._

CAPT. M. What's the trouble, Gaddy--spoiling an honest man's Europe
morning this way? (_Seeing_ G. JUNIOR.) By Jove, that yearling's comin'
on amazingly! Any amount of bone below the knee there.

CAPT. G. Yes, he's a healthy little scoundrel. Don't you think his
hair's growing?

M. Let's have a look. Hi! Hst! Come here, General Luck, and we'll
report on you.

MRS. G. (_Within._) What absurd name will you give him next? Why do
you call him that?

M. Isn't he our Inspector-General of Cavalry? Doesn't he come down in
his seventy-two perambulator every morning the Pink Hussars parade?
Don't wriggle, Brigadier. Give us your private opinion on the way the
third squadron went past. 'Trifle ragged, weren't they?

G. A bigger set of tailors than the new draft I don't wish to see.
They've given me more than my fair share--knocking the squadron out
of shape. It's sickening!

M. When you're in command, you'll do better, young 'un. Can't you walk
yet? Get my finger and try. (_To_ G.) 'Twon't hurt his hocks, will it?

G. Oh, no. Don't let him flop, though, or he'll lick all the blacking
off your boots.

MRS. G. (_Within._) Who's destroying my son's character?

M. And my Godson's. I'm ashamed of you, Gaddy. Punch your father in
the eye, Jack! Don't you stand it! Hit him again!

G. (_Sotto voce._) Put The _Butcha_ down and come to the end of the
veranda. I'd rather the Wife didn't hear--just now.

M. You look awf'ly serious. Anything wrong?

G. 'Depends on your view entirely. I say, Jack, you won't think more
hardly of me than you can help, will you? Come further this way.--The
fact of the matter is, that I've made up my mind--at least I'm thinking
seriously of--cutting the Service.

M. Hwhatt?

G. Don't shout. I'm going to send in my papers.

M. You! Are you mad?

G. No--only married.

M. Look here! What's the meaning of it all? You never intend to leave
_us_. You _can't_. Isn't the best squadron of the best regiment of the
best cavalry in all the world good enough for you?

G. (_Jerking his head over his shoulder_.) She doesn't seem to thrive
in this God-forsaken country, and there's The _Butcha_ to be considered
and all that, you know.

M. Does she say that she doesn't like India?

G. That's the worst of it. She won't for fear of leaving me.

M. What are the Hills made for?

G. Not for _my_ wife at any rate.

M. You know too much, Gaddy, and--I don't like you any the better for
it!

G. Never mind that. She wants England, and The _Butcha_ would be all
the better for it. I'm going to chuck. You don't understand.

M. (_Hotly._) I understand _this_. One hundred and thirty-seven new
horses to be licked into shape somehow before Luck comes round again;
a hairy-heeled draft who'll give more trouble than the horses; a camp
next cold weather for a certainty; ourselves the first on the roster;
the Russian shindy ready to come to a head at five minutes' notice,
and you, the best of us all, backing out of it all! Think a little,
Gaddy. You _won't_ do it.

G. Hang it, a man has some duties towards his family, I suppose.

M. I remember a man, though, who told me, the night after Amdheran,
when we were picketed under Jagai, and he'd left his sword--by the
way, did you ever pay Ranken for that sword?--in an Utmanzai's
head--that man told me that he'd stick by me and the Pinks as long as
he lived. I don't blame him for not sticking by me--I'm not much of
a man--but I _do_ blame him for not sticking by the Pink Hussars.

G. (_Uneasily_.) We were little more than boys then. Can't you see,
Jack, how things stand? 'Tisn't as if we were serving for our bread.
We've all of us, more or less, got the filthy lucre. I'm luckier than
some, perhaps. There's no _call_ for me to serve on.

M. None in the world for you or for us, except the Regimental. If you
don't choose to answer to _that_, of course--

G. Don't be too hard on a man. You know that a lot of us only take up
the thing for a few years and then go back to Town and catch on with
the rest.

M. Not lots, and they aren't some of _Us_.

G. And then there are one's affairs at Home to be considered--my place
and the rents, and all that. I don't suppose my father can last much
longer, and that means the title, and so on.

M. 'Fraid you won't be entered in the Stud Book correctly unless you
go Home? Take six months, then, and come out in October. If I could
slay off a brother or two, I s'pose I should be a Marquis of sorts.
Any fool can be that; but it needs _men_, Gaddy--men like you--to lead
flanking squadrons properly. Don't you delude yourself into the belief
that you're going Home to take your place and prance about among
pink-nosed Kabuli dowagers. You aren't built that way. I know better.

G. A man has a right to live his life as happily as he can. _You_
aren't married.

M. No--praise be to Providence and the one or two women who have had
the good sense to _jawab_ me.

G. Then you don't know what it is to go into your own room and see
your wife's head on the pillow, and when everything else is safe and
the house shut up for the night, to wonder whether the roof-beams won't
give and kill her.

M. (_Aside_.) Revelations first and second! (_Aloud_.) So-o! I knew
a man who got squiffy at our Mess once and confided to me that he never
helped his wife on to her horse without praying that she'd break her
neck before she came back. All husbands aren't alike, you see.

G. What on earth has that to do with my case? The man must ha' been
mad, or his wife as bad as they make 'em.

M. (_Aside_.) 'No fault of yours if either weren't all you say. You've
forgotten the tune when you were insane about the Herriott woman. You
always were a good hand at forgetting. (_Aloud_.) Not more mad than
men who go to the other extreme. Be reasonable, Gaddy. Your roof-beams
are sound enough.

G. That was only a way of speaking. I've been uneasy and worried about
the Wife ever since that awful business three years ago--when--I nearly
lost her. Can you wonder?

M. Oh, a shell never falls twice in the same place. You've paid your
toll to misfortune--why should your wife be picked out more than
anybody else's?

G. I can _talk_ just as reasonably as you can, but you don't
understand--you don't understand. And then there's The _Butcha._ Deuce
knows where the Ayah takes him to sit in the evening! He has a bit of
a cough. Haven't you noticed it?

M. Bosh! The Brigadier's jumping out of his skin with pure condition.
He's got a muzzle like a rose-leaf and the chest of a two-year-old.
What's demoralised you?

G. Funk. That's the long and the short of it. Funk!

M. But what _is_ there to funk?

G. Everything. It's ghastly.

M. Ah! I see.

       You don't want to fight,
         And by Jingo when we do,
       You've got the kid, you've got the Wife,
         You've got the money, too.

That's about the case, eh?

G. I suppose that's it. But it's not for myself. It's because of _them._
At least I think it is.

M. Are you sure? Looking at the matter in a cold-blooded light, the
Wife is provided for even if you were wiped out to-night. She has an
ancestral home to go to, money, and the Brigadier to carry on the
illustrious name.

G. Then it is for myself or because they are part of me. You don't see
it. My life's so good, so pleasant, as it is, that I want to make it
quite safe. Can't you understand?

M. Perfectly. 'Shelter-pit for the Orf'cer's charger,' as they say in
the Line.

G. And I have everything to my hand to make it so. I'm sick of the
strain and the worry for their sakes out here; and there isn't a single
real difficulty to prevent my dropping it altogether. It'll only cost
me--Jack, I hope you'll never know the shame that I've been going
through for the past six months.

M. Hold on there! I don't wish to be told. Every man has his moods and
tenses sometimes.

G. (_Laughing bitterly_.) Has he? What do you call craning over to see
where your near-fore lands?

M. In my case it means that I have been on the Considerable Bend, and
have come to parade with a Head and a Hand. It passes in three strides.

G. (_Lowering voice_.) It _never_ passes with me, Jack. I'm always
thinking about it. Phil Gadsby funking a fall on parade! Sweet picture,
isn't it! Draw it for me.

M. (_Gravely_.) Heaven forbid! A man like you can't be as bad as that.
A fall is no nice thing, but one never gives it a thought.

G. Doesn't one? Wait till you've got a wife and a youngster of your
own, and then you'll know how the roar of the squadron behind you turns
you cold all up the back.

M. (_Aside._) And this man led at Amdheran after Bagal-Deasin went
under, and we were all mixed up together, and he came out of the show
dripping like a butcher. (_Aloud._) Skittles! The men can always open
out, and you can always pick your way more or less. _We_ haven't the
dust to bother us, as the men have, and whoever heard of a horse
stepping on a man?

G. Never--as long as he can see. But did they open out for poor
Errington?

M. Oh, this is childish!

G. I know it is, worse than that. I don't care. You've ridden Van Loo.
Is he the sort of brute to pick his way--'specially when we're coming
up in column of troop with any pace on?

M. Once in a Blue Moon do we gallop in column of troop, and then only
to save time. Aren't three lengths enough for you?

G. Yes--quite enough. They just allow for the full development of the
smash. I'm talking like a cur, I know: but I tell you that, for the
past three months, I've felt every hoof of the squadron in the small
of my back every time that I've led.

M. But, Gaddy, this is awful!

G. Isn't it lovely? Isn't it royal? A Captain of the Pink Hussars
watering up his charger before parade like the blasted boozing Colonel
of a Black Regiment!

M. You never did!

G. Once only. He squelched like a _mussuck_, and the
Troop-Sergeant-Major cocked his eye at me. You know old Haffy's eye.
I was afraid to do it again.

M. I should think so. That was the best way to rupture old Van Loo's
tummy, and make him crumple you up. You _knew_ that.

G. I didn't care. It took the edge off him.

M. 'Took the edge off him'? Gaddy, you--you--you _mustn't_, you know!
Think of the men.

G. That's another thing I am afraid of. D'you s'pose they know?

M. Let's hope not; but they're deadly quick to spot skrim--little
things of that kind. See here, old man, send the Wife Home for the hot
weather and come to Kashmir with me. We'll start a boat on the Dal or
cross the Rhotang--shoot ibex or loaf--which you please. Only _come!_
You're a bit off your oats and you're talking nonsense. Look at the
Colonel--swag-bellied rascal that he is. He has a wife and no end of
a bow-window of his own. Can any one of us ride round him--chalk-stones
and all? I can't, and I think I can shove a crock along a bit.

G. Some men are different. I haven't the nerve. Lord help me, I haven't
the nerve! I've taken up a hole and a half to get my knees well under
the wallets. I can't help it. I'm so afraid of anything happening to
me. On my soul, I ought to be broke in front of the squadron, for
cowardice.

M. Ugly word, that. I should never have the courage to own up.

G. I meant to lie about my reasons when I began, but--I've got out of
the habit of lying to you, old man. Jack, you won't?--But I know you
won't.

M. Of course not. (_Half aloud_.) The Pinks are paying dearly for their
Pride.

G. Eh! Wha-at?

M. Don't you know? The men have called Mrs. Gadsby the Pride of the
Pink Hussars ever since she came to us.

G. 'Tisn't _her_ fault. Don't think that. It's all mine.

M. What does she say?

G. I haven't exactly put it before her. She's the best little woman
in the world, Jack, and all that--but she wouldn't counsel a man to
stick to his calling if it came between him and her. At least, I think--

M. Never mind. Don't tell her what you told me. Go on the Peerage and
Landed-Gentry tack.

G. She'd see through it. She's five times cleverer than I am.

M. (_Aside._) Then she'll accept the sacrifice and think a little bit
worse of him for the rest of her days.

G. (_Absently._) I say, do you despise me?

M. 'Queer way of putting it. Have you ever been asked that question?
Think a minute. What answer used you to give?

G. So bad as _that?_ I'm not entitled to expect anything more, but
it's a bit hard when one's best friend turns round and--

M. So _I_ have found. But you will have consolations--Bailiffs and
Drains and Liquid Manure and the Primrose League, and, perhaps, if
you're lucky, the Colonelcy of a Yeomanry Cav-al-ry Regiment--all
uniform and no riding, I believe. How old are you?

G. Thirty-three. I know it's--

M. At forty you'll be a fool of a J.P. landlord. At fifty you'll own
a bath-chair, and The Brigadier, if he takes after you, will be
fluttering the dovecotes of--what's the particular dunghill you're
going to? Also, Mrs. Gadsby will be fat.

G. (_Limply._) This is rather more than a joke.

M. D'you think so? Isn't cutting the Service a joke? It generally takes
a man fifty years to arrive at it. You're quite right, though. It is
more than a joke. You've managed it in thirty-three.

G. Don't make me feel worse than I do. Will it satisfy you if I own
that I am a shirker, a skrim-shanker, and a coward?

M. It will _not_, because I'm the only man in the world who can talk
to you like this without being knocked down. You mustn't take all that
I've said to heart in this way. I only spoke--a lot of it at least--out
of pure selfishness, because, because--Oh, damn it all, old man,--I
don't know _what_ I shall do without you. Of course, you've got the
money and the place and all that--and there are two very good reasons
why you should take care of yourself.

G. 'Doesn't make it any the sweeter. I'm backing out--I know I am. I
always had a soft drop in me somewhere--and I daren't risk any danger
to _them._

M. Why in the world should you? You're bound to think of your
family--bound to think. Er-hmm. If I wasn't a younger son I'd go too--be
shot if I wouldn't!

G. Thank you, Jack. It's a kind lie, but it's the blackest you've told
for some time. I know what I'm doing, and I'm going into it with my
eyes open. Old man, I _can't_ help it. What would you do if you were
in my place?

M. (_Aside._) 'Couldn't conceive any woman getting permanently between
me and the Regiment. (_Aloud._) 'Can't say. 'Very likely I should do
no better. I'm sorry for you--awf'ly sorry--but 'if them's your
sentiments,' I believe, I really do, that you are acting wisely.

G. Do you? I hope you do. (_In a whisper._) Jack, be very sure of
yourself before you marry. I'm an ungrateful ruffian to say this, but
marriage--even as good a marriage as mine has been--hampers a man's
work, it cripples his sword-arm, and oh, it plays Hell with his notions
of duty! Sometimes--good and sweet as she is--sometimes I could wish
that I had kept my freedom--No, I don't mean that exactly.

MRS. G. (_Coming down the veranda._) What are you wagging your head
over, Pip?

M. (_Turning quickly._) Me, as usual. The old sermon. Your husband is
recommending me to get married. 'Never saw such a one-ideaed man!

MRS. G. Well, why don't you? I daresay you would make some woman very
happy.

G. There's the Law and the Prophets, Jack. Never mind the Regiment.
Make a woman happy. (_Aside._) O Lord!

M. We'll see. I must be off to make a Troop Cook desperately unhappy.
I won't have the wily Hussar fed on Government Bullock Train
shinbones--(_Hastily._) Surely black ants can't be good for The
Brigadier. He's picking 'em off the matting and eating 'em. Here, Senor
Commandante Don Grubbynose, come and talk to me. (_Lifts_ G. JUNIOR
_in his arms._) 'Want my watch? You won't be able to put it into your
mouth, but you can try. (G. JUNIOR _drops watch, breaking dial and
hands._)

MRS. G. Oh, Captain Mafflin, I _am_ so sorry! Jack, you bad, bad little
villain. Ahhh!

M. It's not the least consequence, I assure you. He'd treat the world
in the same way if he could get it into his hands. Everything's made
to be played with and broken, isn't it, young 'un?



MRS. G. Mafflin didn't at all like his watch being broken, though he
was too polite to say so. It was entirely his fault for giving it to
the child. Dem little puds are werry, werry feeble, aren't dey, my
Jack-in-de-box? (_To_ G.) What did he want to see you for?

G. Regimental shop as usual.

MRS. G. The Regiment! _Always_ the Regiment. On my word, I sometimes
feel jealous of Mafflin.

G. (_Wearily._) Poor old Jack? I don't think you need. Isn't it time
for The _Butcha_ to have his nap? Bring a chair out here, dear. I've
got something to talk over with you.

AND THIS IS THE END OF THE STORY OF THE
GADSBYS.

L'ENVOI

       What is the moral? Who rides may read.
         When the night is thick and the tracks are blind.
       A friend at a pinch is a friend indeed;
         But a fool to wait for the laggard behind:
       Down to Gehenna or up to the Throne
       He travels the fastest who travels alone.

       White hands cling to the tightened rein,
         Slipping the spur from the booted heel,
       Tenderest voices cry, 'Turn again,'
         Red lips tarnish the scabbarded steel,
       High hopes faint on a warm hearth-stone--
       He travels the fastest who travels alone.

       One may fall but he falls by himself--
         Falls by himself with himself to blame;
       One may attain and to him is the pelf,
         Loot of the city in Gold of Fame;
       Plunder of earth shall be all his own
       Who travels the fastest and travels alone.

       Wherefore the more ye be holpen and stayed--
         Stayed by a friend in the hour of toil,
       Sing the heretical song I have made--
         His be the labour and yours be the spoil.
       Win by his aid and the aid of disown--
       He travels the fastest who travels alone.




DRAY WARA YOW DEE

For jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the
day of vengeance.
    --_Prov._ vi. 34.

Almonds and raisins, Sahib? Grapes from Kabul? Or a pony of the rarest
if the Sahib will only come with me. He is thirteen three, Sahib, plays
polo, goes in a cart, carries a lady and--Holy Kurshed and the Blessed
Imams, it is the Sahib himself! My heart is made fat and my eye glad.
May you never be tired! As is cold water in the Tirah, so is the sight
of a friend in a far place. And what do _you_ in this accursed land?
South of Delhi, Sahib, you know the saying--'Rats are the men and
trulls the women.' It was an order? Ahoo! An order is an order till
one is strong enough to disobey. O my brother, O my friend, we have
met in an auspicious hour! Is all well in the heart and the body and
the house? In a lucky day have we two come together again.

I am to go with you? Your favour is great. Will there be picket-room
in the compound? I have three horses and the bundles and the horse-boy.
Moreover, remember that the police here hold me a horse-thief. What
do these Lowland bastards know of horse-thieves? Do you remember that
time in Peshawur when Kamal hammered on the gates of Jumrud--mountebank
that he was--and lifted the Colonel's horses all in one night? Kamal
is dead now, but his nephew has taken up the matter, and there will
be more horses amissing if the Khaiber Levies do not look to it.

The Peace of God and the favour of His Prophet be upon this house and
all that is in it! Shafizullah, rope the mottled mare under the tree
and draw water. The horses can stand in the sun, but double the felts
over the loins. Nay, my friend, do not trouble to look them over. They
are to sell to the Officer fools who know so many tilings of the horse.
The mare is heavy in foal; the gray is a devil unlicked; and the
dun--but you know the trick of the peg. When they are sold I go back
to Pubbi, or, it may be, the Valley of Peshawur.

O friend of my heart, it is good to see you again. I have been bowing
and lying all day to the Officer-Sahibs in respect to those horses;
and my mouth is dry for straight talk. _Auggrh!_ Before a meal tobacco
is good. Do not join me, for we are not in our own country. Sit in the
veranda and I will spread my cloth here. But first I will drink. _In
the name of God returning thanks, thrice!_ This is sweet water,
indeed--sweet as the water of Sheoran when it comes from the snows.

They are all well and pleased in the North--Khoda Baksh and the others.
Yar Khan has come down with the horses from Kurdistan--six and thirty
head only, and a full half pack-ponies--and has said openly in the
Kashmir Serai that you English should send guns and blow the Amir into
Hell. There are _fifteen_ rolls now on the Kabul road; and at Dakka,
when he thought he was clear, Yar Khan was stripped of all his Balkh
stallions by the Governor! This is a great injustice, and Yar Khan is
hot with rage. And of the others: Mahbub Ali is still at Pubbi, writing
God knows what. Tugluq Khan is in jail for the business of the Kohat
Police Post. Faiz Beg came down from Ismail-ki-Dhera with a Bokhariot
belt for thee, my brother, at the closing of the year, but none knew
whither thou hadst gone: there was no news left behind. The Cousins
have taken a new run near Pakpattan to breed mules for the Government
carts, and there is a story in Bazar of a priest. Oho! Such a salt
tale! Listen--

Sahib, why do you ask that? My clothes are fouled because of the dust
on the road. My eyes are sad because of the glare of the sun. My feet
are swollen because I have washed them in bitter water, and my cheeks
are hollow because the food here is bad. Fire burn your money! What
do I want with it? I am rich and I thought you were my friend; but you
are like the others--a Sahib. Is a man sad? Give him money, say the
Sahibs. Is he dishonoured? Give him money, say the Sahibs. Hath he a
wrong upon his head? Give him money, say the Sahibs. Such are the
Sahibs, and such art thou--even thou.

Nay, do not look at the feet of the dun. Pity it is that I ever taught
you to know the legs of a horse. Footsore? Be it so. What of that? The
roads are hard. And the mare footsore? She bears a double burden,
Sahib.

And now I pray you, give me permission to depart. Great favour and
honour has the Sahib done me, and graciously has he shown his belief
that the horses are stolen. Will it please him to send me to the Thana?
To call a sweeper and have me led away by one of these lizard-men? I
am the Sahib's friend. I have drunk water in the shadow of his house,
and he has blackened my face. Remains there anything more to do? Will
the Sahib give me eight annas to make smooth the injury and--complete
the insult--?

Forgive me, my brother. I knew not--I know not now--what I say. Yes,
I lied to you! I will put dust on my head--and I am an Afridi! The
horses have been marched footsore from the Valley to this place, and
my eyes are dim, and my body aches for the want of sleep, and my heart
is dried up with sorrow and shame. But as it was my shame, so by God
the Dispenser of Justice--by Allah-al-Mumit--it shall be my own revenge!

We have spoken together with naked hearts before this, and our hands
have dipped into the same dish and thou hast been to me as a brother.
Therefore I pay thee back with lies and ingratitude--as a Pathan.
Listen now! When the grief of the soul is too heavy for endurance it
may be a little eased by speech, and, moreover, the mind of a true man
is as a well, and the pebble of confession dropped therein sinks and
is no more seen. From the Valley have I come on foot, league by league,
with a fire in my chest like the fire of the Pit. And why? Hast thou,
then, so quickly forgotten our customs, among this folk who sell their
wives and their daughters for silver? Come back with me to the North
and be among men once more. Come back, when this matter is accomplished
and I call for thee! The bloom of the peach-orchards is upon all the
Valley, and _here_ is only dust and a great stink. There is a pleasant
wind among the mulberry trees, and the streams are bright with
snow-water, and the caravans go up and the caravans go down, and a
hundred fires sparkle in the gut of the Pass, and tent-peg answers
hammer-nose, and pack-horse squeals to pack-horse across the drift
smoke of the evening. It is good in the North now. Come back with me.
Let us return to our own people! Come!



Whence is my sorrow? Does a man tear out his heart and make fritters
thereof over a slow fire for aught other than a woman? Do not laugh,
friend of mine, for your time will also be. A woman of the Abazai was
she, and I took her to wife to staunch the feud between our village
and the men of Ghor. I am no longer young? The lime has touched my
beard? True. I had no need of the wedding? Nay, but I loved her. What
saith Rahman: 'Into whose heart Love enters, there is Folly _and naught
else._ By a glance of the eye she hath blinded thee; and by the eyelids
and the fringe of the eyelids taken thee into the captivity without
ransom, _and naught else._' Dost thou remember that song at the
sheep-roasting in the Pindi camp among the Uzbegs of the Amir?

The Abazai are dogs and their women the servants of sin. There was a
lover of her own people, but of that her father told me naught. My
friend, curse for me in your prayers, as I curse at each praying from
the Fakr to the Isha, the name of Daoud Shah, Abazai, whose head is
still upon his neck, whose hands are still upon his wrists, who has
done me dishonour, who has made my name a laughing-stock among the
women of Little Malikand.

I went into Hindustan at the end of two months--to Cherat. I was gone
twelve days only; but I had said that I would be fifteen days absent.
This I did to try her, for it is written: 'Trust not the incapable.'
Coming up the gorge alone in the falling of the light, I heard the
voice of a man singing at the door of my house; and it was the voice
of Daoud Shah, and the song that he sang was '_Dray wara yow dee_'--'All
three are one.' It was as though a heelrope had been slipped round my
heart and all the Devils were drawing it tight past endurance. I crept
silently up the hill-road, but the fuse of my matchlock was wetted
with the rain, and I could not slay Daoud Shah from afar. Moreover,
it was in my mind to kill the woman also. Thus he sang, sitting outside
my house, and, anon, the woman opened the door, and I came nearer,
crawling on my belly among the rocks. I had only my knife to my hand.
But a stone slipped under my foot, and the two looked down the hillside,
and he, leaving his matchlock, fled from my anger, because he was
afraid for the life that was in him. But the woman moved not till I
stood in front of her, crying: 'O woman, what is this that thou hast
done?' And she, void of fear, though she knew my thought, laughed,
saying: 'It is a little thing. I loved him, and _thou_ art a dog and
cattle-thief coming by night. Strike!' And I, being still blinded by
her beauty, for, O my friend, the women of the Abazai are very fair,
said: 'Hast thou no fear?' And she answered: 'None--but only the fear
that I do not die.' Then said I: 'Have no fear.' And she bowed her
head, and I smote it off at the neck-bone so that it leaped between
my feet. Thereafter the rage of our people came upon me, and I hacked
off the breasts, that the men of Little Malikand might know the crime,
and cast the body into the water-course that flows to the Kabul river.
_Dray wara yow dee! Dray wara yow dee!_ The body without the head, the
soul without light, and my own darkling heart--all three are one--all
three are one!

That night, making no halt, I went to Ghor and demanded news of Daoud
Shah. Men said: 'He is gone to Pubbi for horses. What wouldst thou of
him? There is peace between the villages.' I made answer: 'Aye! The
peace of treachery and the love that the Devil Atala bore to Gurel.'
So I fired thrice into the gate and laughed and went my way.

In those hours, brother and friend of my heart's heart, the moon and
the stars were as blood above me, and in my mouth was the taste of dry
earth. Also, I broke no bread, and my drink was the rain of the Valley
of Ghor upon my face.

At Pubbi I found Mahbub Ali, the writer, sitting upon his charpoy and
gave up my arms according to your Law. But I was not grieved, for it
was in my heart that I should kill Daoud Shah with my bare hands
thus--as a man strips a bunch of raisins. Mahbub Ali said: 'Daoud Shah
has even now gone hot-foot to Peshawur, and he will pick up his horses
upon the road to Delhi, for it is said that the Bombay Tramway Company
are buying horses there by the truck-load; eight horses to the truck.'
And that was a true saying.

Then I saw that the hunting would be no little thing, for the man was
gone into your borders to save himself against my wrath. And shall he
save himself so? Am I not alive? Though he run northward to the Dora
and the snow, or southerly to the Black Water, I will follow him, as
a lover follows the footsteps of his mistress, and coming upon him I
will take him tenderly--Aho! so tenderly!--in my arms, saying: 'Well
hast thou done and well shalt thou be repaid.' And out of that embrace
Daoud Shah shall not go forth with the breath in his nostrils. _Auggrh!_
Where is the pitcher? I am as thirsty as a mother-mare in the first
month.

Your Law! What is your Law to me? When the horses fight on the runs
do they regard the boundary pillars; or do the kites of Ali Musjid
forbear because the carrion lies under the shadow of Ghor Kuttri? The
matter began across the Border. It shall finish where God pleases.
Here, in my own country, or in Hell. All three are one.

Listen now, sharer of the sorrow of my heart, and I will tell of the
hunting. I followed to Peshawur from Pubbi, and I went to and fro about
the streets of Peshawur like a houseless dog, seeking for my enemy.
Once I thought I saw him washing his mouth in the conduit in the big
square, but when I came up he was gone. It may be that it was he, and,
seeing my face, he had fled.

A girl of the bazar said that he would go to Nowshera. I said: 'O
heart's heart, does Daoud Shah visit thee?' And she said: 'Even so.'
I said: 'I would fain see him, for we be friends parted for two years.
Hide me, I pray, here in the shadow of the window shutter, and I will
wait for his coming.' And the girl said: 'O Pathan, look into my eyes!'
And I turned, leaning upon her breast, and looked into her eyes,
swearing that I spoke the very Truth of God. But she answered: 'Never
friend waited friend with such eyes. Lie to God and the Prophet, but
to a woman ye cannot lie. Get hence! There shall be no harm befall
Daoud Shah by cause of me.'

I would have strangled that girl but for the fear of your Police; and
thus the hunting would have come to naught. Therefore I only laughed
and departed, and she leaned over the window-bar in the night and
mocked me down the street. Her name is Jamun. When I have made my
account with the man I will return to Peshawur and--her lovers shall
desire her no more for her beauty's sake. She shall not be _Jamun_ but
_Ak_, the cripple among trees. Ho! Ho! _Ak_ shall she be!

At Peshawur I bought the horses and grapes, and the almonds and dried
fruits, that the reason of my wanderings might be open to the
Government, and that there might be no hindrance upon the road. But
when I came to Nowshera he was gone, and I knew not where to go. I
stayed one day at Nowshera, and in the night a Voice spoke in my ears
as I slept among the horses. All night it flew round my head and would
not cease from whispering. I was upon my belly, sleeping as the Devils
sleep, and it may have been that the Voice was the voice of a Devil.
It said: 'Go south, and thou shalt come upon Daoud Shah.' Listen, my
brother and chiefest among friends--listen! Is the tale a long one?
Think how it was long to me. I have trodden every league of the road
from Pubbi to this place; and from Nowshera my guide was only the Voice
and the lust of vengeance.

To the Uttock I went, but that was no hindrance to me. Ho! Ho! A man
may turn the word twice, even in his trouble. The Uttock was no _uttock_
(obstacle) to me; and I heard the Voice above the noise of the waters
beating on the big rock, saying: 'Go to the right.' So I went to
Pindigheb, and in those days my sleep was taken from me utterly, and
the head of the woman of the Abazai was before me night and day, even
as it had fallen between my feet. _Dray wara yow dee! Dray wara yow
dee!_ Fire, ashes, and my couch, all three are one--all three are one!

Now I was far from the winter path of the dealers who had gone to
Sialkot and so south by the rail and the Big Road to the line of
cantonments; but there was a Sahib in camp at Pindigheb who bought
from me a white mare at a good price, and told me that one Daoud Shah
had passed to Shahpur with horses. Then I saw that the warning of the
Voice was true, and made swift to come to the Salt Hills. The Jhelum
was in flood, but I could not wait, and, in the crossing, a bay stallion
was washed down and drowned. Herein was God hard to me--not in respect
of the beast, of that I had no care--but in this snatching. While I
was upon the right bank urging the horses into the water, Daoud Shah
was upon the left; for--_Alghias! Alghias!_--the hoofs of my mare
scattered the hot ashes of his fires when we came up the hither bank
in the light of morning. But he had fled. His feet were made swift by
the terror of Death. And I went south from Shahpur as the kite flies.
I dared not turn aside, lest I should miss my vengeance--which is my
right. From Shahpur I skirted by the Jhelum, for I thought that he
would avoid the Desert of the Rechna. But, presently, at Sahiwal, I
turned away upon the road to Jhang, Samundri, and Gugera, till, upon
a night, the mottled mare breasted the fence of the rail that turns
to Montgomery. And that place was Okara, and the head of the woman of
the Abazai lay upon the sand between my feet.

Thence I went to Fazilka, and they said that I was mad to bring starved
horses there. The Voice was with me, and I was _not_ mad, but only
wearied, because I could not find Daoud Shah. It was written that I
should not find him at Rania nor Bahadurgarh, and I came into Delhi
from the west, and there also I found him not. My friend, I have seen
many strange things in my wanderings. I have seen Devils rioting across
the Rechna as the stallions riot in spring. I have heard the _Djinns_
calling to each other from holes in the sand, and I have seen them
pass before my face. There are no Devils, say the Sahibs? They are
very wise, but they do not know all things about devils or--horses.
Ho! Ho! I say to you who are laughing at my misery, that I have seen
the Devils at high noon whooping and leaping on the shoals of the
Chenab. And was I afraid? My brother, when the desire of a man is set
upon one thing alone, he fears neither God nor Man nor Devil. If my
vengeance failed, I would splinter the Gates of Paradise with the butt
of my gun, or I would cut my way into Hell with my knife, and I would
call upon Those who Govern there for the body of Daoud Shah. What love
so deep as hate?

Do not speak. I know the thought in your heart. Is the white of this
eye clouded? How does the blood beat at the wrist? There is no madness
in my flesh, but only the vehemence of the desire that has eaten me
up. Listen!

South of Delhi I knew not the country at all. Therefore I cannot say
where I went, but I passed through many cities. I knew only that it
was laid upon me to go south. When the horses could march no more, I
threw myself upon the earth, and waited till the day. There was no
sleep with me in that journeying; and that was a heavy burden. Dost
thou know, brother of mine, the evil of wakefulness that cannot
break--when the bones are sore for lack of sleep, and the skin of the
temples twitches with weariness, and yet--there is no sleep--there is
no sleep? _Dray wara yow dee! Dray wara yow dee!_ The eye of the Sun,
the eye of the Moon, and my own unrestful eyes--all three are one--all
three are one!

There was a city the name whereof I have forgotten, and there the Voice
called all night. That was ten days ago. It has cheated me afresh.

I have come hither from a place called Hamirpur, and, behold, it is
my Fate that I should meet with thee to my comfort, and the increase
of friendship. This is a good omen. By the joy of looking upon thy
face the weariness has gone from my feet, and the sorrow of my so long
travel is forgotten. Also my heart is peaceful; for I know that the
end is near.

It may be that I shall find Daoud Shah in this city going northward,
since a Hillman will ever head back to his Hills when the spring warns.
And shall he see those hills of our country? Surely I shall overtake
him! Surely my vengeance is safe! Surely God hath him in the hollow
of His hand against my claiming. There shall no harm befall Daoud Shah
till I come; for I would fain kill him quick and whole with the life
sticking firm in his body. A pomegranate is sweetest when the cloves
break away unwilling from the rind. Let it be in the daytime, that I
may see his face, and my delight may be crowned.

And when I have accomplished the matter and my Honour is made clean,
I shall return thanks unto God, the Holder of the Scale of the Law,
and I shall sleep. From the night, through the day, and into the night
again I shall sleep; and no dream shall trouble me.

And now, O my brother, the tale is all told. AHI! AHI! ALGHIAS! AHI!




THE JUDGMENT OF DUNGARA

See the pale martyr with his shirt on fire.--_PRINTER'S ERROR._

THEY tell the tale even now among the groves of the Berbulda Hill, and
for corroboration point to the roofless and windowless Mission-house.
The great God Dungara, the God of Things as They Are, Most Terrible,
One-eyed, Bearing the Red Elephant Tusk, did it all; and he who refuses
to believe in Dungara will assuredly be smitten by the Madness of
Yat--the madness that fell upon the sons and the daughters of the Buria
Kol when they turned aside from Dungara and put on clothes. So says
Athon Daze*, who is High Priest of the shrine and Warden of the Red
Elephant Tusk. But if you ask the Assistant Collector and Agent in
Charge of the Buria Kol, he will laugh--not because he bears any malice
against missions, but because he himself saw the vengeance of Dungara
executed upon the spiritual children of the Reverend Justus Krenk,
Pastor of the Tubingen Mission, and upon Lotta, his virtuous wife.